start question
life-insurance
What Is Custom Whole Life Insurance ?
Custom whole life insurance is a company specific product that allows you to select how many years you will pay on your whole life policy before it will be paid up . If the premium paying period is shortened the premium deposits will be increased , however , the cash value will increase more swiftly , lowering the cost for insurance and ultimately the cost for owning the policy . A single premium whole life insurance policy is , from that perspective , the least expensive policy that you can purchase .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
As Peggy said , Custom Whole Life is a term that New York Life uses . Basically the `` custom '' part simply means the number of years the policy will be funded . The standard terminology is `` 10 year pay '' , or `` 15 year pay '' , etc. . Which again refers to the number of years the policy will be funded by paying premiums . Typically whole life policies are designed to have premiums paid over the life of the client up to age 100 . So shorter , `` custom '' funding periods result in considerably higher premium payments . The advantage is that the premium payments end much earlier and the cash value increases faster .
Whole Life Insurance can range in price from very low to very high . It depends on your age and health among other things . We always recommend getting a policy of whole life for a child , to insure their `` insurability '' for the future , at an extremely low cost . As you get a big older , the price rises , but slowly . The younger you are , the better it is to get whole life then , before it continues to rise . With good health and a reasonable age , whole life can be very affordable , especially when you factor in it allows you to take cash out for emergencies or retirement , or to help pay the future premiums . New York Life even offers Custom Whole Life , which allows you to stop paying your premiums completely and keep your life insurance . Gary Lane , Agent , New York Life , 949 797 2424 . Thank you .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
Medicare Supplements are the same for all Insurance carriers as the types of supplements offered are determined by the government . As such companies are limited as to what they can and can not offer to the public . There are really only three variations as to what companies can offer ; 1 -RRB- Pricing - Insurance companies set their own pricing based on their own criteria . 2 -RRB- Customer service - every company claims to have great customer service . 3 -RRB- Agent participation - agents vow to always be there and add a personal touch . If you are looking for a supplement then you need to compare prices , how they handle customer service and agent involvement .
Most companies will have a medical question referring to it or similar . Had a customer black out due to low blood sugar and carrier was refusing to pay due to disclosure failure . Had another customer who was blind in one eye . That carrier did not have a medical question about that -LRB- only diabetes -RRB- . customer never had a wreck with the good eye ... can not say the same for the other . He said it was not his fault he did not see it coming -LRB- did not turn his neck far around enough to look -- carrier did pay . Usually if the car is adapted for a disability no problem . They have not figured out how to adapt for blackouts for high or low sugar.Did have one customer upset that a carrier would not insure her , she explained that she only had seizures at night and saw no reason why she could not drive in the daytime .
What is your whole life policy worth ? In what way do you mean ? Could you be referring to the worth a whole life creates by the peace of mind it brings ? the fact that the insured controls the policy not the company ? The worth of having a policy that will see you all the way through ? Or are you asking about cash values ? For cash values , simply call the customer service department and ask them what the balance is ...
The word `` best '' is so subjective . Best what ? Best rates ? Best underwriting ? Best customer service ? Best claims payment history ? When you look at Insurance , compare it to purchasing an automobile . You have Mercedes , BMW , Toyota , Ford , Chrysler , Volvo . Which car is best ? Thats hard to say . Each of these makers produce cars that will start and take you to your destination . They can come with a lot of the things that make our car ride enjoyable . But what do you want ? Comfort ? Style ? Good gas mileage ? Ability to be driven for years ? High mileage capability ? It all depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay to get it . Insurance is the same way . Talk to an agent and clearly define what you want . Then look for companies that offer that product . Then you can compare prices , look into how they handle claims , customer service , etc. . Finally , realize that most Insurance companies -LRB- due to heavy regulations -RRB- have to meet certain standards to remain an Insurance company . That being said you can usually find a good fit for your circumstances if you do your research .
Neither is ` best ' in terms of comparing one against the other . What you need to look at is what you are going to count on this insurance plan for and why you need it . Term insurance is better for covering large amounts for shorter periods of time , such as putting a policy in place to ensure your children -LRB- or grandchildren -RRB- will have money for college should something happen to you prior to them completing college . Or you could set up a policy that would pay off your mortgage and/or other debts so you do n't leave those behind in the event something happens prior to them being paid off . Whole Life insurance is better for establishing long term wealth accumulation . Here 's an example of the way I set up one of my customers . Since it is possible to have multiple policies , we set up a 10 year term policy listingtheir children as beneficiaries to guarantee they have money for college . We also calculated how much income they would potentially earn during that 10 year period and included that amount so their spouse was n't left without income . Then we set upa 20 year term policy equal to the amount of theirhome mortgage so that would be paid off and calculated who much income they would earn during this next 10 year period.Finally , we establisheda whole life policy witha small face valueto help establishan estate for theirheirs . Since the whole life policy pays out the face value or the cash value , whichever is higher , the ` death benefit ' of the whole life policy increased as time went on . We also established that when the 10 year policy expired , if their income level permitted , they would continue making those monthly payments , but they would add that to the Whole Life policy . Doing this dramatically increased the cash accumulation of that policy after the 10 year mark . So my recommendation for you is to meet with a qualified insurance agent or financial planner to establish the right scenario for you and your family .
As a financial professional in the business for over 20 years , I do n't recommend whole life insurance in any form to my clients . Instead , I believe in level term life insurance which will provide enough cash at death to cover all debt including the mortgage , final expense , and education for the children . Because of the tremendous savings with the purchase of tem life there is more money to put toward paying down debt and investing forretirement . Going back to the word `` custom '' in the question , I really customize a financial plan that is unique to the individual or family beginning with life insurance as the foundation of that plan that will protect the assets as they grow . The need for life insurance will always decrease as the years pass .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In a whole life policy the company assumes responsibility to make sure that the policy will meet all of its promises . The customer only needs to pay the premiums . In a variable life policy , the customer directs where the money paid to the company will be invested . The company is only required to pay the death claim when there is sufficient cash in the policy to keep it in force .
I agree with Cathy , but also offer one other major reason rates go up . Insurers are pricing a product before they know their cost . It something like building a spec house for sale at $ 300,000 with out knowing that the purchaser is going to require all hard wood floors , a finished basement and a three car garage . Had you known you would have priced your product at $ 400,000 . This is some of the dilemma of insurers . Thy can look at historical outcomes and yet may not see a trend developing before it happens . The reason most auto insurance is sold in Six month terms in the US , is that it often takes a minimum of one year for the carrier to realize rate level on all customers in a certain state and rate filing . Let me give an example : If company A sees it needs rate increase on its TX auto insurance business and puts that rate into effect after state approval on July 1,2014 it will take a full six months to raise the rate level to the new level for the last customer whose policy incepts on 12/31/2014 . Then it takes the company another 6 months to earn the premium for each of those customers . It has to set aside some money in case you decide to move your business , as well as keep reserves for accidents that have occurred or are known to be likely to occur in the future.So in a full year at 7/1/2015 the company has realized the effects of its rate filing in the state . If it now needs more funds , it will take the same 12 months to fully earn that premium . So in effect you can see that the process of getting an adequate rate for an insurers losses and expected losses is at least a year on six month polices and double that to two years to achieve the rate level on annual policies . That said , recognize that your rates can go up annually in a 12 month policy because of a company 's filings and go up as much as every six months for an insurer who uses 6 moth policies.So , all that said , you do n't control the pricing that is an aggregate need of the insurer but you can better protect yourself by buying a 12 month policy . Lock in a rate level . If you do not change the exposure -LRB- new car or new operators and such -RRB- , you will have locked in rate for one whole year . So my advice is to seek out an insurer that writes annual policies if available .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Custom whole life insurance is a company specific product that allows you to select how many years you will pay on your whole life policy before it will be paid up . If the premium paying period is shortened the premium deposits will be increased , however , the cash value will increase more swiftly , lowering the cost for insurance and ultimately the cost for owning the policy . A single premium whole life insurance policy is , from that perspective , the least expensive policy that you can purchase .
If the Company is paying its employees to drive the vehicles , the company must have a Commercial Auto Policy . The commercial auto policy also must include non-owned vehicle coverage when your employees are driving the car . The customer can not sign an agreement to only sue the driver because the insurance company the customer has is required to act on behalf of the customer regarding subrogation . The company 's insurance will be responsible for any damage or theft while the vehicle is in the company employee 's possesion . Keith Prim - Dallas - 214-435-0791
They certainly can ! Of course an insurance company is in business to make money , just like any other business . They will review your policy every year at the renewal to determine if they want to continue to offer coverage at the same price , at a higher or lower price , or at all . If you look like you will be a long term profitable customer over time they will certainly continue coverage -LRB- the price might go up -RRB- , but if you look to be a non-profitable customer over time , they will cancel your policy . Each Insurance company has a different profile they look at before offering renewal . Some things you can do to help if you are worried about being cancelled are : 1 . Do n't file small claims . Insurance is meant to be for catastrophic losses . 2 . Carry a high deductible . Again , Insurance is meant for catastrophic losses . 3 . Insure your Auto , Home and Life with the same company . The more policies they have with you , the greater the chance that you will be a profitable customer to them over time . 4 . Keep a well maintained home . Insurance companies know that detail oriented owners who take care of their property are less likely to have claims , and when they do those claims will be smaller . 5 . Work with your agent to get his advice ! If I can be of any help email me at dbeukel1@amfam.com .
To get a paid up life policy , you would normally pay more than the normal premium for a few years , resulting in no further premiums being ever due on a Whole Life Policy . One product which New York Life specializes in that does this is called Custom Whole Life , which is frequently bought by Grandparents to protect their Grand Children for the entire life of that grandchild . What a Gift ! Sure beats toys . The proceeds can even be used to help fund a college education , when a loan is taken out on the policy for that purpose . Talk with a qualified agent . Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life . 949 797 2424 . Thank you .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Type Of Home Care Does Medicare Cover ?
Medicare is very limited on what it will pay for home care or any other type of long term care . Medicare will only pay for skilled care after a hospitalization of three days not counting day of admission . It will pay for an Occupational or Speech Therapist , a nurse , and other very limited services in the home on a very temporary basis . Do not rely on Medicare for your Long Term Care needs .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- cover some part-time home health services such as physical therapy , skilled nursing care , speech-language pathology servcies , etc. . Medicare does not pay for 24 hour home health care however , nor meals delivered to your home , personal care , and homemaker services . Please note , there are a number of conditions that must be met for Medicare to cover your home health care . If you need more than part-time/intermittent home care , Medicare will not cover the expenses . Home health care is very expensive and you can deplete your savings paying for it . For someone wanting 24-hour home health care to be covered by their insurance , they should look into securing a long-term care insurance policy . While long-term care can be an expensive type of insurance to have , you 're paying pennies on the dollar if you needed to make a claim on the coverage . There 's many moving parts to long-term care insurance . If you 're looking to secure this type of coverage , it 's most helpful to consult with an experienced broker to help build a policy that will best serve your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A is , in short , your hospital insurance . It covers inpatient hospital care , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hopsice care , and home health services . Please note , there are limitations to what Medicare pays and for how long it will pay for given services . If you want to have adequate coverage for long-term care types of services -LRB- e.g. nursing home care , hospice care , and home services -RRB- , you will want to supplement your Medicare coverage with a separate long-term care policy . Medicare Part B is , in short , your physician insurance . This part of Medicare covers things like doctor visits , lab tests , surgeries , ambulance services , durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- , and other outpatient services . Medicare Part A & Part B are commonly referred to as Original Medicare and only covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of expenses . While 20 % does n't seem like it 's going to have a high dollar figure , the bill can add up quite fast . The idea of a Medigap plan is to create a predictable expense structure . If you do n't have a Medigap plan and visited the hospital/had a surgery/etc . , you 'll end up with a massive medical bill real quick . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Statistically , nearly everyone will at some point need some type of care in their lifetime . As we get older our health declines . We are unable to do things for ourselves . The cost can be tremendous . Nursing Home average cost is between $ 6000 and $ 7000 . Cost for Assisted Living runs around $ 4000 . Home Health Care runs between $ 15 and $ 20 per hour . Medicare is very limited on what they will pay and does not pay for custodial care . The options , the family can try to care for the loved one . While many families try to take care of their loved one at home , the burden can be great , especially if the family has children in addition to caring for a loved one . Very often the situation is so bad it becomes nearly impossible without help . You can private pay for help either at home or a care facility , but it does n't take a mathematician to figure out that any assets would be rapidly depleted leading to the final option , go on Medicaid . Long Term Care provides funds to pay for care without having to lose everything you have worked hard to provide and the legacy you wanted to leave behind for your children and grandchildren . It relieves the burden and embarassment of having our personal needs taken care of by family members . Anyone who has ever been a caregiver knows how hard it can be . Why buy Long Term Care Insurance ? Because you love your family !
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Medicare is insurance coverage for `` medical care '' and does not cover the costs of assisted living facilities or long-term care facilities -LRB- custodial care -RRB- . Medicare will however cover qualified healthcare costs while a Medicare beneficiary is living at an assisted living facility . Medicare is more often used to pay for a skilled nursing facility or home health care . There are always exceptional circumstances that will allow Medicare to cover different types of care , for example , while in a qualified stay at a skilled nursing facility a Medicare beneficiary may also receive custodial care , but in most cases Medicare wont cover the costs of `` custodial care . '' In some states , Medicaid will pay for some of the costs associated with assisted livingif a qualified beneficiary has a limited income . Medicaid is designed to help seniors and some individuals with disabilities pay for healthcare when they are unable to pay for it themselves . Check on qualification requirements and available waiver programs for assisted living with your state Medicaid department . Individuals should seek out an extended care insurance specialist to understand options and formulate a plan to financially address assisted living or long term care needs before any such care may be needed . Jeffrey J. VanCleve 800-211-0017
You should purchase long term care insurance if you have a substantial amount of money saved up or invested that you do not want to go to pay for long term care costs , if such care is needed . When people become unable to care for themselves due to illness or age , and if it becomes necessary to hire in home care or move to where extended care is provided , the cost for that type of care is steep . It can deplete savings quickly , and in order for Medicaid to help , the law dictates that the person receiving the care must first deplete investments and assets down to a set amount . Having long term care insurance pays the bills for in home care , nursing home care , or other types of care that are needed , thus protecting assets and investments . Having this source of funding also allows you to make more choices in your care rather than having to rely on what Medicaid will allow .
Under Medicare any type of Home Health Care is limited . They will provide some skilled care on a temporary basis but Medicare generally will not pay for custodial care in any long term care environment . That is why it is important to carry some type of Long Term Care Insurance that will provide Home Health Care . Some policies even pay family members for providing care . A good agent who does long term care planning can help you find a program that will help .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- cover somehome health care services such as skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language pathology services , to name a few . A home health care agency will usually coordinate your services as ordered by your doctor . Some home health care services are not covered by Medicare , including : 1 -RRB- 24/7 care at home 2 -RRB- Delivered meals 3 -RRB- Homemaker services -LRB- e.g. cleaning your house , doing your laundry , etc. -RRB- 4 -RRB- Personal care -LRB- e.g. helping you bathe , get dressed , etc. -RRB- You should check with Medicare what they will pay exactly for your home care services . In general , you 're paying $ 0 except for your 20 % of durable medical equipment -LRB- covered under Part B -RRB- - a Medicare supplement plan can pay this portion .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare is very limited for any type of long term care , including the home . Medicare does not pay for custodial care . It will pay for some temporary skilled care in your home if you need some type of rehab services such as occupational , speech , or physical therapy . It may also pay for some durable medical equipment . Do not rely on Medicare as a source for any extended home health care .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Medicare does not cover Long Term custodial care . As stated by Peggy Mace , coverage for any type of ursing Home care is limited . If a person is admitted to a nursing home or requires care at home there is no coverage unless that person is considered capable of improvement with the help of rehab and requires Skilled Care . Do not look to Medicare to cover your long term care needs !
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Can I Buy Life Insurance On ?
To purchase a life insurance policy on someone , you must have what is deemed to be an insurable interest . This means that you would incur a financial loss or harm if the insured was to pass away prior to you . This could include purchasing coverage on your spouse , children -LRB- though normally at a reduced amount of coverage , though it does come at a very low cost -RRB- , your parents , and , in some circumstances , a key person in a company which you may own or operate .
You can buy life insurance on someone with whom you have an `` insurable interest '' . That means that there would be a financial loss to you if they were to pass away . You can buy a policy for your children , as long as it is of a reasonable amount . And most companies will allow you to buy a small final expense policy for your parents .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
There are different schools of thought on how long you need life insurance . Some believe that you only need life insurance until you save up enough so that your dependents would do OK , even if your died prematurely . That philosophy is often called , `` buy Term , invest the rest . '' Those who like this idea tend to buy shorter terms and pay as little as possible for their life insurance , with the hopes that by the time their Term policy ends , they will not need to buy more . Some choose the age of retirement as their cutoff point for owning life insurance , with the intention of having all debts paid off and money for retirement saved up by then . On the opposite side of the fence are those who would use life insurance for a lot of their supplemental income and security in later life , and thus only buy permanent policies . Not only do they spend more on premiums than those who buy Term only , but they may even increase their premiums so that their policies are paid up by the time they retire . Many people fall somewhere in between . They buy what is most cost effective for each particular need . E.g. . They may buy Term for the bigger expenses in their lives , such as getting their kids raised . And they might buy a smaller Whole or Universal Life policy for their final expense needs . Then try to diversify their investments as is prudent at each stage of their lives , and in accordance with the economy , and products offered at that time .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Do you buy running shoes for a marathon form Wal-Mart ???? Do you buy a 4 cylinder truck to pull a trailer that really demands a V8 ? My point is , `` WHO CARES who has the cheapest '' . Yes , there is a way to assess apples to apples when buying home insurance . Red vs. green apples . There are always some differences in policies . However , in my state , there is a vast difference in plans offered . You are buying something to guard your finances in the event of the loss of your home , valuables , or retirement -LRB- that 's called Liability Coverage folks -RRB- . BUY THE MOST you can reasonably afford . I did a quote once and for curiosity I raised our `` in house standard amount of liability '' form 300K to 500K -LRB- the next step up for that carrier -RRB- ... What did I see ???? A ONE DOLLAR difference ... Yes ... ONE dollar . $ 200,000 more in coverage for a buck . That does n't happen for everyone and every carrier . Yet it 's almost always less than $ 10 a month . WOW ... 200K more for $ 10 a month ... . You 'll pay the price if you buy on price . - gravy
A person can own as many Life Insurance policies as they desire if they qualify for the coverage and can pay for them . The biggest problem is that without proper counseling the policy may not fit the need that the person was purchasing the policy for . Many policies are put on the market to meet specific needs and because of the public knowledge a person may buy a policy that they thought meant one type of coverage when in actuality it was completely different coverage . Over my lifetime I have worked with persons who would buy term policies when in their mind they had mixed them up with policies which are paid up early , ie , ten pay life , etc. . I have met more than one individual who through the years had bought 10 year term thinking it was like ten pay life and that it would be paid up in ten years . I want to stress here that buying a Life Insurance policy without understanding all of its reasons for existence is like buying any auto with four wheels without knowing anything further . I would also like to point out that most Life Insurance policies have what is called a `` policy fee '' that is attached to the premium of the policy . What this means is that the company is charging fifty to sixty dollars per year for the administration of that policy and there is no coverage on that amount of the premium . I have had people want several smaller policies to avoid taking a medical . This also can be a mistake since most companies have discounts on the larger amounts of Life Insurance on an individual . In today 's life you can find an individual who has knowledge in all fields of finance . If that person is living up to the pledges made to become an agent they will educate the client and help them purchase the proper Life Insurance and investments without sales pressure . A good agent builds clients for a lifetime ! Allen D. `` Al '' Mitchell , Ph.D. , CLU , FLMI Author `` The Prophets Dollar '' second edition .
Yes , more than likely you can , just like you can buy many insurance products on line . There are certainly arguments to be made for buying insurance that way and many major companies are including a `` direct line '' purchase option along with the more traditional distribution of products through a local licensed agency force . I know I myself am a licensed Professional Insurance adviser so I am biased , but it seems to me that we need to focus on what exactly we are buying when we make an insurance purchase . Sure , a policy is a document and a price is charged for what it represents , but i am convinced that most of us buy these things expecting that we 'll never have to use them , Hence the natural inclination to buy the cheapest . My opinion is that there are reasons to start your search on line , but talk to your local Insurance Professional for sound advice before buying anything .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Where to buy life insurance if purchased properly should be a guided purchase . Just to buy a policy usually winds up being a mistake in the future or at least when you run into an agent wanting to sell a policy then it becomes like the used car problem . Yours is wrong ! Persons who just buy life insurance in today 's life without any kind of knowledge or counseling is kind of following the idea that they know it all and need no knowledgeable assistance . The best solution to purchasing life insurance is to find a knowledgeable agent who can , through in depth research of your total financial needs , guide you and tell you the why 's of certain policies . There is no one policy that is better than all others for everyone . If you have an insurance agent that is really interested in you and your situation that individual will spend time with you without pushing for a quick sale . The real desire of that agent must be to be a mutually beneficial part of your life and the agent . The agent will educate you on the possibilities and the reason for different types of policies . Then , with your help , find something that will fit into your financial plan . You should have a total financial plan that you are working toward , consisting of a proper budget , proper life insurance , -LRB- and other insurance -RRB- , proper investments and investments that are balanced for long range safety and fit your own desires . Buying life insurance properly is far more complicated than buying a policy . Many just buy a policy and then blame someone else for the failure of that policy to do the job it was purchased for . Allen D. Mitchell , Ph.D. , CLU , FLMI Author , second edition `` The Prophets Dollar ''
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
I suppose the best approach is what to avoid when buying a term life insurance policy . Personally , I would avoid a policy that is offered free of medical qualification if I knew that I was in satisfactory shape . I would be reluctant to buy a term life insurance policy that was offered through the mail or over the radio . In the end I would buy a term life insurance policy from an agent that I trusted .
If you are considering term insurance please ask yourself these questions . How old am I ? If I buy 20 year term now how old will I be when I have to buy another policy ? Does it meet your needs to buy term life considering the objective of the policy ? The purpose of term has always been to allow the purchaser to invest the difference between the cost of term life and permanent coverage . How much are you `` investing '' now ? Every policy you have means you are paying `` administrative costs '' for that policy . What if you have one good size permanent policy purchased at your current age to meet all your life insurance needs or can you buy a term life and then be able to meet your financial objectives and not have to buy another life insurance policy ? Finally , you need to have a personal advisor that puts your needs first and has the integrity to make recommendations based on your TOTAL financial plan and not some life insurance agent pedaling life insurance
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Critical Illness coverages can provide money to replace lost income and to pay the expenses not coverage by your medical insurance . Studies have shown that medical insurance covers only about 40 % of the true cost of a serious disease such as disease . In addition to medical coinsurance and deductibles , there is loss of income to contend with . The person that is off sick may have disability income insurance to help with this but often the spouse has to also miss work and there is nothing to replace their income . And , if it is their child that is sick , often both will miss work with no income replacement . When you add all the additional expenses of travel , special diets , transportation , child care , etc. the additional expenses can be devastating to a family . One thing I had never thought of before I had a bout with cancer was clothing expenses . I went from 215 lbs to 140 lbs which meant i had to buy new clothes . Now that I am at 185 lbs , my fat clothes do n't fit and my skinny clothes don '' t fit so I have to buy more . Critics of Critical Illness insurance say it is not a good buy because you might have a condition that is not covered under the policy but if you bought a plan that covered every possible event , the cost would be prohibitive . However , you can buy coverage for some of the most common serious conditions at a very reasonable premium . I have never had a cancer patient tell me that their caner or CI policy was a bad buy .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can You Switch From Medicare Advantage To Medigap ?
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You are allowed to switch from a Medicare Advantage plan under certain conditions . If you are 65 or older and have been on Medicare Part B for less than 6 months you can switch to original Medicare and a Medigap . If you are in your Advantage trial right period , you can switch to Medigap . If you can pass underwriting requirements , you can switch to Medigap .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You are allowed to switch from a Medicare Advantage plan under certain conditions . If you are 65 or older and have been on Medicare Part B for less than 6 months you can switch to original Medicare and a Medigap . If you are in your Advantage trial right period , you can switch to Medigap . If you can pass underwriting requirements , you can switch to Medigap .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Yes , you can switch from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . To do so , you must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage plan . Then you must enroll in original Medicare . If anyone asks you to buy a Medigap policy without being enrolled in original Medicare , you should report them . If you have never used Medigap before and you had Medicare Advantage for under a year , you can have your choice of Medigap policies .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , each year Medicare Advantage has a Annual Enrollment Period typically from October 15 - December 7th that you can switch plans . You can also leave the Medicare Advantage plan and enroll in a Medicare Supplement plan . Many people are switching from a Medicare Advantage plan to a Medicare Supplement plan because of all the changes that keep happening to the Medicare Advantage plans .
There are different kinds of supplemental plans that are sometimes coupled with a Medicare Advantage plan . As others have pointed out , you do not need a traditional Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan in addition to your Advantage plan . Some carriers offer cancer plans , hospital indemnity plans and other single purpose plans . You will be told you need these plans to fill the gaps in Medicare Advantage plans and cover your out of pocket expenses in the event of a hospitalization or severe illness . Truth is , you do n't need these add on plans . Just a waste of your money and a way for the agent pushing them to pad his or her wallet at your expense . If you feel you will have difficulty paying your out of pocket expenses which can be several thousand dollars under a Medicare Advantage plan , you should consider switching to traditional Medicare and buying a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan . Medigap plan N is a good transition product or for those on a tight budget , Medicare supplement plan Hi F. #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans #GaMedigapQuotes
You can switch your Medicare Advantage plan during the annual open enrollment period that begins in October and runs through December . There are a few other times when Medicare allows you to switch Advantage plans . If your Medicare Advantage carrier goes out of business -LRB- like Universal Healthcare -RRB- you can change to another Advantage plan or return to original Medicare and qualify for a Medicare supplement plan . If you leave your Advantage plan service area is another qualifying event .
You can switch your Medigap Plan at any point throughout the year . You do not have to wait for AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period from Oct. 15 - Dec 7 -RRB- . AEP only applies to Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug Plans . If you are not in your Open Enrollment Period or another Guaranteed Issue situation , you 'll have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan . This means you have to answer health questions on the insurance application and then get approved through the medical underwriting department . To see if you are still in Open Enrollment or any other Guaranteed Issue situation , it is best to contact Medicare or an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . If you have to qualify medically for a new Medigap Plan , an independent agent can review your health history and let you know which insurance companies you may qualify with . There are many reasons why you may want to switch Medigap plans -LRB- lower premium , more benefits , less benefits -RRB- . Please feel free to read this article which gives a little more detail about changing your Medigap insurance . WEBSITELINK Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you with your specific situation .
Assuming you are not under 65 and disabled , you can apply any time you are at least 65 years old and enrolled in both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- original Medicare -RRB- . If you are on a Medicare Advantage Plan , you may not purchase a Medicare Supplement unless you switch back to original Medicare . The best time to `` sign up '' for a Medicare Supplement or `` Medigap '' policy is during your Medigap Open Enrollment Period , which lasts for 6 months and begins on the first day of the month your both 65 or older and enrolled in Medicare Part B . During your Medigap Open Enrollment Period , an insurance company can not use medical underwriting and can not rufue to sell you any Medigap policy it offers .
When you have a Medicare Advantage plan you do n't need any form of supplemental insurance plan . The Medicare Advantage plan is all inclusive , albeit with a lot of out of pocket expenses if your health takes a turn for the worse . Sometimes unscrupulous agents will try to convince you to buy a Medigap plan , hospital indemnity plan , or cancer plan to fill the holes in your Advantage plan . If you feel like you need another insurance policy to fill the gaps you would be better off dropping the Advantage plan and switching to a Medigap policy .
You can switch Medigap policies at any time , but it is important to understand potential obstacles . If you are outside of your Medigap open enrollment period -LRB- the 6-month period that begins on the first day of the month in which you 're 65 or older and enrolled in Part B -RRB- , then you will likely have to go through health underwriting to switch to a new plan or insurance company . Some companies do allow you to change your Medigap Plan if you remain with them , e.g. going from a Plan F to a Plan G , without new health underwriting ; but if you change insurance companies you will have to answer all health questions on the application . A new insurance company may deny you coverage based upon evaluation of your current health , so you may not be able to switch your Medigap policy to a new company . It is important to work with a licensed and experienced agent who can place you with a reputable company for the long term when you are in your Medigap open enrollment period .
Typically , when you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and you have a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan , you will not need to have an additional health plan . Original Medicare -LRB- parts A & B -RRB- cover approximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses - Medigap plans will pay all or a portion of the other 20 % . If you have group coverage as well , you would be spending extra money on those premiums unnecessarily . You can not be forced to go on her group health insurance if the two of you got married - it 's only an available option for you . If you have a Medicare supplement plan other than a plan F or plan G , I would recommend switching to one of those two plans before adding yourself to your fiance 's group coverage - it would save you countless dollars by comparison . Plan F provides full coverage - every other plan provides good coverage , but you will share some of the expenses . I would recommend consulting with an experienced independent Medigap broker who can review your specific situation and help you determine the best course of action . I would also suggest reviewing the Medigap plan you currently have to see if there are better rates available -LRB- the plans are standardized meaning you regardless of which carrier it 's through , the benefits are exactly the same - plan F from company A is the same as plan F from company B -RRB- . Changing a Medigap plan can be completed at anytime during the year - you do not have to wait for the annual enrollment period like you would with prescription drug plans or Medicare advantage plans . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage -LRB- my background is in senior insurance -RRB- and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can switch from Medigap to Medicare Advantage plans during the Annual Election Period , which runs from October 15th-December 7th each year . Then , cancel your Medigap and/or Part D Rx plan . If Rx coverage is desired , you will want to sign-up for a Medicare Advantage with Prescription Drug -LRB- MAPD -RRB- plan .
Yes , you can switch from Medigap to Medicare Advantage -LRB- during annual open enrollment -RRB- . The question is , why do you want to ? Your Medigap plan most likely has less than $ 500 out of pocket if you have a bad year . You have $ 0 out of pocket with plan F and $ 2110 with Hi F. Medicare Advantage has an out of pocket of $ 2700 to $ 5700 PLUS your OON charges .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Do I File A Claim With Medicare ?
Medicare claims are handled electronically by medical providers . I have never seen a paper claim form for Medicare and doubt if it exists . All providers that treat Medicare beneficiaries are requried to file claims with Medicare . It does not matter if your provider accepts assignment or not . They must still file the claim on a timely basis .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
In most cases , you do not need to file a claim to Medicare , as doctors/hospitals are required to file these claims for you in a timely manner for Medicare-covered services and supplies . If , however , your doctor has not filed a claim , you can contact them and ask them to do so or call Medicare at 1-800-MEDICARE . If it is close to the time limit -LRB- 12 months -RRB- and your doctor has not filed the claim , you can do so using Medicare 's Patient Request for Medicare Payment Form -LRB- CMS-1490S -RRB- . WEBSITELINK
I am not aware of any way for an individual to file a claim with Medicare . Medicare requires medical providers to file claims directly on your behalf and do so on a timely basis . Claims are filed electronically , adjudicated by Medicare , and then Medicare files your approved claim with your Medigap carrier via crossover .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
ABN stays for Advanced Benificiary Notice of Noncoverage . A doctor or Medcare provide may give you an ABN if they believe Medicare may not pay for the service you require . The ABN lists the services and items that Medicare isn ; ' t expected to pay for , an estimate of their cost and what Medicare may not pay for them . There are 3 options for you to choose from on the ABN form . 1 . You want the item or service , the provider may ask you to pay for them but you want a claim submitted to Medicare . The claim may be denied , you may be responsible to pay the provider but you can file an appeal to Medicare . Option 2 : You want the items or service but you do not want the provider to make a claim to Medicare . You may be asked to pay for the items or serivce now . Since the provider did not file a cliam to Medicare you can not file an appeal . Option 3 : You do not want the item or servce trhat may not be paid for by Medicare .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
That is a great question ! As far as your insurance company is concerned , it will make no difference who caused the damage that resulted in your claim , the fact that they have to pay out on it is what matters . If the claim is filed listing your husband as the cause of the damage , then it is a pretty good bet that one of you will see a rate hike , if not both -LRB- if you are on separate policies - one a work vehicle , paperwork not completed , etc. -RRB- . That said , there are some things to consider . Your policy may have a `` first accident forgiveness '' clause , and assuming that this is his/your first accident -LRB- many companies now offer this -RRB- you may not have any change in your rates . Another thing to consider is whether the damage done to your car will cost less to fix than your deductible amount is . If the repairs are $ 500 and your deductible is $ 1000 , you would end up paying for the repairs yourself anyway . At that point , does it make sense to report the accident at all and risk the rate hike ? I 'd suggest that you review your policy and look for the forgiveness clause , and see if that would work for you . I 'd also get an estimate or two , and compare them to the deductible you would end up paying . If you have the forgiveness perk , and the damage is extensive , I 'd file the claim . If the damage is less than the deductible , I 'd probably skip filing the claim , and just get the damage repaired . It might work best if you contact your agent and ask them how they recommend you proceed as they would know much better your policy and driving records than I would . I hope that helps , and that you find a pleasant outcome to your unpleasant problem ! Thank you for asking !
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
There are 2 ways to file a claim you can contact the carrier claim number that is listed on your policy or you can contact your agent that wrote your policy . I Always instruct our clients to contact us 1st that way we can document your file and make sure that your claim has been process right away and filed correctly . having to file a claim is stressful enough a good agent should be able to guide you through the process
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
You are not allowed to have both a Medigap and Medicare Advantage plan . Even if you were , you do n't need both . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are essentially in a privatized Medicare plan . Your claims are handled by the insurance carrier . Claims are filed with the carrier , not Medicare . Any issues you have are handled by your carrier . If you have original Medicare , you should consider a Medigap plan to limit your out of pocket exposure . In this arrangement your provider files the claim for you with Medicare who adjudicates the claim then sends it on to your Medigap carrier .
From the agents perspective this is what happens : 1 . Client gets into an accident and needs to make a claim : 1a . The client contacts the agent and the agent files the claim by filling out the appropriate ACORD form . 1b . The client contacts the insurance company directly and files the claim that way . 2 . The insurance company will do one of a couple of things : 2a . The insurance company will process the claim quickly and pay out the amount as is stated in the insurance agreement -LRB- e.g. actual cash value or agreed upon amount -RRB- . 2b . The insurance company will send an adjuster to investigate the claim and pay out according to the adjuster 's findings . 2.c The insurance company is going to deny the claim because it was not due to a covered peril . If 2b . or 2c . occurs then you should contact your agent and let him/her deal with the insurance company to try and get you more money for your claim . Most states have a time limit for how long it can take the insurance company to respond . I know in Michigan the insurance company must respond within 30 days of a valid claim . If nothing has been sent back -LRB- either a payment or dispute -RRB- then you should contact your agent or the governmental agency that oversees insurance . I hope this helps .
Claim history is a big factor for insurance companies but just because you have a claim does n't mean your rate is going to increase . Several factors are used to determine a rate including the length of time you have been with an insurance company , credit , type of claim filed , amount of claim , castropheclaimsect . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover `` sudden and accidental '' losses . It is not a maintenance policy and you do not want to file small claims . Filing frequent , small claims will cause your rateto increase or your policy may be cancelled .
Medicare claims are handled electronically by medical providers . I have never seen a paper claim form for Medicare and doubt if it exists . All providers that treat Medicare beneficiaries are requried to file claims with Medicare . It does not matter if your provider accepts assignment or not . They must still file the claim on a timely basis .
Medicare Part A is typically $ 0 as long as you met your 40 quarters -LRB- or 10 years -RRB- of working life and paying FICA taxes -LRB- Medicare taxes -RRB- . If you have not met that requirement , the monthly premium is up to $ 426 per month . For 2014 , the premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 . This can change each year and is based on your modified adjusted gross income on your tax return from 2 years prior . You may also face a high-income premium penalty on your Part B coverage . The $ 104.90 premium is for those with incomes of $ 85,000 or less , if filing an individual tax return , and $ 170,000 , if filing a joint tax return . If your income was between $ 85,000 and $ 107,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 170,000 and $ 214,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 146.90 . If your income was between $ 107,000 and $ 160,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 214,000 and $ 320,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 209.80 . If your income was between $ 160,000 and $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 320,000 and $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 272.70 . If your income was above $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 335.70 . You can encounter other expenses as well such as the Part A and Part B deductibles and late enrollment penalties for not enrolling in Part B when you were first eligible for Medicare . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of healthcare expenses . You 're generally responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan can greatly help establish a predictable expense structure - essential for individuals on a fixed income in retirement . It will limit the amount of cost you 're susceptible to in the event of an illness or injury .
Medicare Advantage plans are quite different from a Medicare supplement plan , also known as Medigap . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer in original Medicare . Your health insurance is covered by a private insurance carrier . Medical providers file your claims with your Advantage carrier , not Medicare . Most Advantage plans have networks you are required to use if you want full coverage . Some Advantage plans provide OON -LRB- out of network -RRB- coverage but with higher deductibles , copay 's and coinsurance . HMO Advantage plans typically have no benefits when you use a non-par provider . With original Medicare you have the freedom to use any doctor , hospital or other medical provider anywhere in the country . There are no networks . Medical providers file claims with Medicare . Once Medicare adjudicates and approves the claim it is forwarded on to your Medigap carrier so they can pay their portion .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
Why Buy Critical Illness Insurance ?
You should consider critical illness insurance if your family medical history is predisposed to chronic health problems or diseases that run in your family throughout recent generations . As you grow older , you may have had behaviors that can lead to critical illness like tobacco additions that leave you vulnerable to respiratory problems or obesity that lends itself to a variety of health problems .
People buy critical illness insurance to protect their family against undue financial hardship if they should become diagnosed with a serious illness . People are surviving serious health conditions more often , and for more years , than in the past . At the same time , it seems that everyone has a close relative or acquaintance who has had cancer or heart disease or other serious illnesses . These are just some of the factors that compel people to buy critical illness insurance .
Right Peggy !! The `` death benefit '' inside a disability policy is usually limited to a few months worth of the `` Monthly Benefit '' . So if your benefit is $ 3,000 a month , then you might get 3 , 6 , maybe 9 thousand in a death benefit . LOOK AT THE LANGUAGE . Does it pay ONLY AFTER you have met an elimination period or is it an immediate benefit ? Disability is a very important plan to own . Yet , I know that buying life insurance , buying disability , buying long term care , buying critical illness , & then buying home , auto , umbrella , & more can be very overwhelming ... . You might consider buying a Living benefits & / or Hybrid Life insurance plan ... These are life insurance plans that you can use BEFORE you die . I have a massage therapist that owns a plan with a death benefit , a $ 30,000 critical illness benefit , and has a $ 1000 a month disability benefit . She pays about $ 43 month for all of this . PERFECT for single mom with a modest income . YES ... standalone Disability has more features and better terms ... yet the all in one plan allows her to cover a critical illness , a disability , & early death . Reach out with questions :--RRB- - gravy
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
Critical illness is a specialized form of what used to be called `` dread disease '' coverage . More comprehensive than a simple cancer plan , critical illness policies normally pay a lump sum benefit on first diagnosis of listed medical conditions including heart attack , cancer , stroke and another 3 - 7 named conditions . Most carriers do not issue critical illness after age 65 or 70 . Buy a health insurance plan , not a life plan with a critical illness rider .
People who buy critical illness insurance are those who have a genetic predisposition to certain illnesses based on family history , smokers -LRB- who have increased risk for getting some diseases -RRB- , those who have had loved ones with critical illnesses and have seen the impact firsthand , and those who do not have savings on hand to pay for the costs that come with this type of diagnosis -LRB- loss of work , travel , child care , bills -RRB- . All type of people buy critical illness insurance .
In sports there are `` odds '' ... What are the odds of hitting a hole in one ? An average golfer on a 200-yard par-3 : 150,000 to 1 . Odds of myself or David/Ted -LRB- above -RRB- ... one in TWO ... Ladies are lucky ... it 's only 1 on 3 ... So yes , `` cancer insurance '' is a great protection plan to own . Let 's compare Cancer insurance to protection plan that is growing in popularity , Critical Illness -LRB- CI -RRB- . Cancer insurance covers ?? ... . YES ... ding , ding , ding ... cancer . Most benefits are paid out on a scheduled basis . Meaning you get `` so much for each item eligible for a claim '' . Each treatment/service has a named value : Chemo - So much per treatment . Surgery - a specific amount . Hospital stay - A specific amount per day . Possibly more for ICU . & it goes on ... . Critical Illness pays a lump sum upon diagnosis . There is no need to continually update the carrier about treatments , surgeries , & hospital stays . Think of it as upfront money vs. trickling in over time . Since Critical Illness Insurance typically ahs a benefit for Cancer , heart attack/stroke , and other life changing illnesses -LRB- like blindness & paralysis -RRB- , the one policy can do a lot more for you over a lifetime . Which is better , Cancer or Critical Illness insurance ? As you will see in many of my posts ... UNDERWRITING is the key . Always buy the most coverage for your monthly premium dollars based on the underwriting . - gravy
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
Critical illness policies cover as many as 15 or so different kinds of illness . Most critical illness plans pay a lump sum cash benefit on first diagnosis provided you meet the terms of the policy . In evaluating critical illness plans read and understand the definitions and make sure you buy a health based plan .
Generally , critical illness insurance is not a taxable benefit . The money that is used to purchase critical illness insurance has already been taxed , since critical illness insurance is not tax exempt as a medical expense . Thus , the benefits paid if the critical illness policy pays out , are not taxable .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
Life insurance covers you in the event of death . Critical illness covers you while you are alive , providing cash to care for the extra expenses involved with a critical illness . Some life insurance policies offer a critical illness rider that will pay a portion of the death benefit while you are still alive . if you are diagnosed with a critical illness
This depends on the amount of money that you have saved to cover the costs associated with the immediate needs of a critical illness . If you have funds available to cover medical expenses of a critical illness , you may not need critical illness insurance . If you do not have the extra funds , than critical illness insurance can keep you from financial ruin .
Accident and Critical illness insurance are similar in structure , but cover different things . Both policies will typically pay out a lump sum or up the benefit amount directly to the insured or a provider of their choice . The difference however is that accident plans only cover medical expenses associated with an accident where as critical illness insurance pays lump sum upon diagnosis of a major critical illness . Make sure to read the list of covered critical illness ' in the policy before purchasing .
People buy critical illness insurance to protect their family against undue financial hardship if they should become diagnosed with a serious illness . People are surviving serious health conditions more often , and for more years , than in the past . At the same time , it seems that everyone has a close relative or acquaintance who has had cancer or heart disease or other serious illnesses . These are just some of the factors that compel people to buy critical illness insurance .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Cracks In Foundation ?
` Maybe ' is the most accurate answer . It is not meant to avoid answering the question but it must be remembered that the standard homeowner policy does not automatically cover damages to the structure . It is not a maintenance policy . To determine if the policy will cover such damages , the actual cause of the crack or cracks needs to be determined first .
A homeowners policy covers damage caused by a named peril . If the cracks in the foundation are the result of a specified peril , fire , wind , hail etc. the loss would be covered . There are perils that are not included such as earth movement . Earth movement would be the most likely cause of a crack in the foundation . Please consult with your agent prior to filing a claim .
Only if it is something that is sudden and accidental which is the key to all insurance claims . Depending on how it occurred and what made it happen is the criteria used for settling claims . As the others have mentioned , a crack in a wall / foundation etc are maintenance issues meaning over the course of owning a home you should keep the property well kept when something happens . Examples are a roof that is wearing out and needs replaced , the foundation with cracking or bowing , etc. .
In short , the answer is yes . But it needs to be clarified whether you are asking for property damage to the pool itself or liability coverage . Both would be covered barring any specific pool exclusions , which I am not aware of any in the standard market . If someone were to get injured while swimming in the pool , yes , your homeowners policy should cover you for liability . Likewise , if you pool is damaged due to the standard homeowners causes of loss less any standard exclusions then the pool would be covered for property damage to the pool itself . Keep in mind that wear and tear would not be covered under your policy . So if your pool liner rips `` just because '' or the concrete foundation cracks , those would be considered wear and tear . Please note that many insurance carriers are very cautious when writing homeowners insurance on homes that have pools . Some do not like to write them with a pool exposure , some do not mind , so be sure to ask your agent how it might affect your current coverage and future coverage and what the premium impact might be . You also want to strongly consider higher liability limits in purchasing an umbrella or if you already have an umbrella policy then higher umbrella limits . It might cost you $ 150 for each additional $ 1 mil limit . Lastly , if you have a pool and want to make sure you are covered for the proper limits , make sure your coverage B -LRB- other structures -RRB- limit is sufficient to cover any losses to your pool and any other structures i.e. detached garages , sheds as well .
Although the foundation is not a part of the computation upon which the replacement value of the home is established , it might be covered if there is direct physical loss by one of the named perils -LRB- in the all-risk policy it would be any peril other than those excluded . -RRB- It is very difficult to think of a circumstance where coverage would apply . The mere presence of a cracked foundation is insufficient .
Great Question that is most asked by homeowners in California or other state that have Earth movement . Usally this question if not easy to answer with a yes . But it would be something to ask your current insurance company but most policies do not cover foundation cracks . Always check your own policy .
Homeowners Insurance generally excludes settling of a home . Your standard HO 3 policy will read an Exclusion for : Settling , shrinking , bulging or expansion , including resultant cracking , of bulkheads , pavements , patios , footings , foundations , walls , floors , roofs or ceilings . However in any potential claim situation I recommend you consult your insurance provider .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Home owners insurance will typicallynot cover foundation cracks that are not caused by a covered peril . This is typically considered to be part of basic home maintenance . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and exclusions within the coverage or call your local agent to have them explain your policy 's coverage and exclusions .
Possibly yes and possibly no ! The question that needs to be answered is how the water got there . If the water is ground water entering the home thru doors and windows , only flood insurance , NOThomeowners insurance , covers the resultant damage . And even with flood insurance the coverage is very limitedin areas of the home below grade . If the source of the water is seepage thru cracks in the foundation there is no coverage . If the source of the water is sump pump failure , whether by power outage , mechanical failure or simply being overwhelmed , you will need to have optional coverage available from many insurers . The same for the source of the water being a back up of the sewer system . If the source of the water is overflow from above , such a burst washer hose or clogged commode , there would likely be coverage . You will want to consult your insurance professional for a detailed review of the coverage you have and/or need .
Homeowners Insurance does cover Swimming Pools as ` Other Structures ' which is usually 10 % of the Dwelling Coverage amount on the policy . A swimming pool is covered for the same perils that cover the home . The most common covered claim for a swimming pool would be a liability claim or medical payments claim for a slip and fall injury ; some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board or slide in order to avoid this risk . One of the more common questions regarding a swimming pool is coverage for cracks in the pool . Cracks are usually caused by land movement or earthquakes ; this is not covered on a homeowners policy . Earthquake coverage would need to be purchased to cover this sort of damage to a swimming pool ; however , the deductible and special limits will apply to swimming pools . Please review your coverage details prior to purchasing coverage .
Most homeowners policies wo n't cover problems with your foundation unless something sudden and accidental has happened to it . It 's designed to cover damage , not deterioration . It 's pretty rare for something to happen that damages a foundation . Most property claims are caused by storms or fire , and neither of these will usually damage foundation . If the foundation is sagging , leaking , crumbling , or deteriorating in some way , it 's the homeowner 's responsibility to maintain it . If you live in a newer home that has serious foundation problems , you may have recourse against the builder . Foundation problems can cause significant damage to your home and personal property . Your insurance company is n't going to repair or replace property damaged by a leaky or crumbling foundation .
` Maybe ' is the most accurate answer . It is not meant to avoid answering the question but it must be remembered that the standard homeowner policy does not automatically cover damages to the structure . It is not a maintenance policy . To determine if the policy will cover such damages , the actual cause of the crack or cracks needs to be determined first .
You can purchase an endorsement called Water/Sewer Backup which will cover resulting damage from a water/sewer line backup . The sewer line itself is not covered but the resulting damage is covered . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . It is not a maintenance policy and it does not cover damage from wear and tear so if you sewer line needs to be replaced because it is old or tree roots have cracked the pipe , there is no coverage .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
A homeowners policy pays for damages cause by named perils . The perils most likely to affect a foundation would be earth movement or flood . The most common homeowners policy excludes coverage for those perils . You can get policies to cover each of those circumstances . If , however , the foundation was damaged as the result of a named peril , such as fire , the damages would be covered under the Homeowners policy .
If the crack in the chimney liner was caused by a covered loss and the crack is a detriment to the safety of the residents or adversely affects the property it may be covered . Every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand what coverage is provided and what exclusions there may be .
If the cause of a slab leak is a named peril the leak will be covered . In an all-risk policy that includes every conceivable cause of loss except those specifically excluded . Some of those exclusions could cause a slab to leak . There isnt coverage if the slab leaks because of underground water , or earth movement . If the crack was the result of settling , cracking , or shrinking the claim would not be covered .
If the driveway is bulging , cracking or just plain going bad for various reasons homeowners insurance does not cover this type of damage . It is possible to have the driveway covered if damage was caused from a major fire which could of lead to thedamageof the driveway which would fall under other structure coverage . Consult your agent on the specific details of your potential loss or inquiry as your agent would be familar with the exact details andcoverage ` sof your policy
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Auto Insurance Go Down When You Get Married ?
It can go down yes , in part because of your marriage but also in part because you have added your new spouse and their car to your policy . In addition to different rating factors that a company may have filed to use you could also be taking advantage of a multi car discount .
Your auto insurance often reduces when you get married , although there are a few factors that impact the discount . If you are very young -LRB- under age 30 -RRB- , the reduction is likely to be larger . At older ages , there may not be much of a difference . There are many additional discounts that can reduce your premium . As experienced brokers , we shop all of the top-rated companies and find the lowest prices , so you can save !
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
The best answer to this is maybe . You can receive discounts for many things when applying for auto insurance . One of the available discounts is being married . However , if you are married , and only have one car then you are effectively nullifying the discount . The reason for this is the corollary discount to being married is the multi-car discount . If you are sharing a car with your spouse , then you will be rated for two drivers with one auto , which means more exposure and subsequently higher premiums . So the best way to maximize your insurance discounts is be married , each drive your own car , and throw on a type of homeowners policy , even if you are just renting . I hope this helps .
It is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . Generally speaking , two single individuals insuring their own cars may pay more than two married individuals insuring their two cars together . There are a couple of factors that may cause this . First , the rate structure that a company has for sigle folks as opposed to married folks . The second is a multi car discount aht can further drive down the cost for the married folks . Always be sure to ask about any available discounts when making your decisions on your car insurance .
Being Married or not married is a rating factor in auto insurance . This is not to be mistaken as a discount . Variable rating factors ultimatelydetermine your final rate . Being married in most cases has a favorable rating factor . The criteria is with almost all insurance carriers is you must reside together or be able to explain a really good reason why you are not residing together if you wish to obtain the married rate . The spouse is not necessary required to be listed on the policy as an operator but must be disclosed as a household member .
Great question ! Many insurance companies offer multiple car discounts and I have seen substantial savings for couples who combine their auto policies . A good agent will be able to place you with the right company that will provide the best discount for your combined policy . That said , there is no reason a couple needs to wait to get married to get an auto policy together . I have written policies for stable couples who have an established relationship without yet being married . Please let me know if I can be of any assistance ! Carl Houde
Getting married does not affect Medicare except in one way . The premium you pay for Part B may change , as that is based on your and your spouse 's income together . Getting married does NOT affect your plan , your deductibles , your co-pay 's , your premium for Part C and D , etc. .
Many factors can keep your auto insurance rates down . First would be a clean driving record . No moving violations in the last 3 years and no at-fault accidents . The longer your driving record is clean the better as some insurance carriers discount if clean for 5-7 years . Being married tends to lower your rate . Packaging polices such as home and umbrella tend to lower auto insurance rates . If your a student having a 3.0 or better will lower your rate . Making sure there is no gaps in your insurance will also help to get you a better rate depending on the state you reside in . Credit is another factor for some states and of course the type of car you drive , how many miles you drive annually and coverage 's you select all are factors in your rate . Insurance coverage is consultative which is why I recommend you talk to a local independent agent who can help find you the right coverage 's at the right premium .
Getting married does not automatically kick you off of your parents ' health insurance plan.You can stay on your parents ' health plan up until age 26 . What getting married does is give you and your new spouse a special enrollment period to apply for a new plan if you want to look at other coverage and see if there is a better option for you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a very good question , there are many elements today that go into the cost of insurance . When you look at when does car insurance become less expensive there are a few factors that may help . If you have had any accidents and/or tickets your premium could decrease once they have fallen off after years -LRB- carrier 's vary as time -RRB- , when your premier score has increased -LRB- similar to a credit score -RRB- as well as changes in life such as getting married or graduating college can decrease your auto premium .
No . A boyfriend or girlfriend does not meet the legal criteria for being considered an eligible dependent -LRB- you can imagine how complicated that could getin some people 's lives -RRB- . Legally married spouses are still generally considered eligible dependents though that coverage option is evolving rapidly due to a quirk in the health care reform law that does not define spouses as dependents . Natural born and step-children and individuals for which a person has a court order appointing them as legal guardian also qualify as dependents . I 'm afraid you 'll have to get married if you want to get covered under your boyfriend 's health insurance .
In California there isnt a discount available for married people . Single drivers pay the same as married drivers based upon their years of experience and driving record . Life Insurance policies are available to joint lives regardless of the marital status . Homeowners policies , likewise , do not lower the cost for married couples as opposed to other arrangements . Marriage may be an asset in many regards ; however , it does not enjoy lower costs in the insurance world .
When you get married your car insurance should be less unless your spouse has a bad driving record or poor credit . Credit is a major factor for car insurance and when you get married some companies will average your credit scores and some will take the highest credit score . Make sure you ask about a multi-car discount as well .
Car insurance rates are based on many factors , including your marital status . If you are married , statistically , you have a lower chance of having an at-fault accident compared to if you were single . It 's upon this basis that insurers therefore charge married persons less than a single person that drives the same vehicle and has the same driving record etc. . . The marriage discount is larger when you are younger , and can vary between 10 % -30 % . Although it is substantial , do n't get married just for the discount ! Your spouse may spend a lot more money than you realize !
There are three basic planning goals for life insurance : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification At minimum , seniors have final expense liabilities that they generally dont desire to pass on to their children . Covering those expenses with a final expense life insurance product is a great alternative with a company that offers benevolent geriatric underwriting . Life insurance underwriting is extremely important as you become older , especially if you need more coverage than final expense . A good life insurance company that has sizable retention and death benefit break points can really help keep the price tag down . Retention is the risk the life insurance company is willing to take on without sharing the risk with other life insurance companies . The bigger the retention , the more wiggle room to negotiate the underwriting offer . And death benefit break points can reduce the cost of insurance as you buy more coverage . Break points generally start at $ 250,000 , then $ 500,000 , $ 1,000,000 and $ 3,000,000 . Guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice . Income Life insurance has the potential to generate tax advantaged income and , if properly designed , may generate tax free income as long as the policy is issued as a non-modified endowment contract and is kept in force for the life of the insured . Some seniors use life insurance tax free income in tandem with their Social Security benefits and defer their qualified plan distributions until age 70 . Its a good planning strategy . Life insurance policies with the least expense loads are the most desirable . Indexed universal life may be the best policy choice . Inheritance Many seniors desire to make a difference with their children , grandchildren and charities . A survivorship policy for married couples is the best solution because in leverages two lives on one contract and pays the death claim at the death of the second insured . Survivorship guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice for married couples and guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice for single seniors . We spreadsheet the life insurance companies based on underwriting , product provisions and price , assisting seniors in the decision making process .
Marriage is a rating factor for auto insurance so first off , congratulations if you are getting married and second , being married can have apositiveimpact on your rates . There are other factors to consider like multi car , age of additional drivers and possible even multi policy discounts . I would suggest for a big life change like marriage you consult your local agent for your insurance needs .
Medicare Part A is typically $ 0 as long as you met your 40 quarters -LRB- or 10 years -RRB- of working life and paying FICA taxes -LRB- Medicare taxes -RRB- . If you have not met that requirement , the monthly premium is up to $ 426 per month . For 2014 , the premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 . This can change each year and is based on your modified adjusted gross income on your tax return from 2 years prior . You may also face a high-income premium penalty on your Part B coverage . The $ 104.90 premium is for those with incomes of $ 85,000 or less , if filing an individual tax return , and $ 170,000 , if filing a joint tax return . If your income was between $ 85,000 and $ 107,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 170,000 and $ 214,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 146.90 . If your income was between $ 107,000 and $ 160,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 214,000 and $ 320,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 209.80 . If your income was between $ 160,000 and $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 320,000 and $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 272.70 . If your income was above $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 335.70 . You can encounter other expenses as well such as the Part A and Part B deductibles and late enrollment penalties for not enrolling in Part B when you were first eligible for Medicare . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of healthcare expenses . You 're generally responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan can greatly help establish a predictable expense structure - essential for individuals on a fixed income in retirement . It will limit the amount of cost you 're susceptible to in the event of an illness or injury .
Wow , people keep asking this question . Does n't anybody get married anymore ? No , you ca n't add your girlfriend to your healthinsurance , she 's not a legal dependent . Girlfriends and boyfriends have a tendency to come into and then drift out of our lives . That 's why they are referred to as friends . Husbands and wives on the other hand have this certain `` stickiness '' and tend to hang around for a long time . Maybe even until death do you part . The bottom line is if you think so highly of your girlfriend that you want to put her on your health insurance then it 's time to make it legal . Of course , now in the era of ObamaCare even marrying her may not be a guarantee you can add her to your employer 's health insurance . Interestingly enough , ObamaCare did n't bother to define spouses as dependents -LRB- I did n't make the law folks I just inform people about it -RRB- and so with health insurance rates skyrocketing you are seeing increasing numbers of employers requiring spouses who are employed at another company that offers health insurance to enroll in their employer 's plan . And a few have gone all in on that interpretation of the law and are n't covering spouses at all -LRB- still pretty rare -RRB- . But , in general , you have to be married to your girlfriend to cover her as a dependent on your health insurance .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
end question
start question
annuities
Why Buy Annuities ?
Product suitability should be a required process of prudence for all potential financial product purchases , including tax deferred and immediate annuities . If your effective tax bracket is high , tax deferred annuities over time can have accumulating advantages , i.e. mid to long term , high tax bracket savers and investors should consider tax deferred annuities . Tax deferred annuities have three basic crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . A risk tolerance assessment needs to be performed to determine your financial profile and product suitability . Keep in mind that tax deferred variable annuities can lose money .
When you ask which life insurance is best in Illinois there are a lot of thing to consider . First of all why are you buying the policy ? Are you buying it to pay your house off if you die , to pay for a funeral , to leave your family with extra money to help them re-adjust their life after you die or are you buying it as a retirement vehicle to replace your 401K . When you figure outthe why , then we can start to narrow down which company has that type of insurance to meet your needs . My years of experience has taught methat there is no one company that can meet all the individual needs of every person . I always look at the WHY first , then I can educate you on the different companies that could fit your needs . If you need more help feel free to Skype me or call 630-918-1673
I ca n't think of a time that Variable annuities are a good idea . If you are going to buy an variable annuity , you might as well just buy mutual funds . Why pay the fees attached to the variable annuity ? The only feature of a variable annuity that is even attractive is the income rider and you can get the same or better income rider from an indexed annuity that wo n't give you the growth potential that a mutual fund would but it does offer downside protection .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
That is a great question ! There are several reasons why annuities can be a good investment , and some reasons why they may not be . The downside ? the purpose of an annuity is to save up for a later payout , so there are steep penalties for taking out the money early . Once you 've put your money in , you have to leave it there for a period of time , so you need to be able to leave that cash alone . You 'll need to have an adequate savings , and cash flow to cover whatever may occur before the withdrawal time comes . Depending upon the annuity , there might mot be the return that you might get from an alternative investment . The pluses ? There are great guarantees . You will know exactly what you have at risk , and what your potential gains will be . It 's unusual to lose money with the right annuity , and most will guarantee no less than what you started it with , so even if the markets and interest rates tank , you get back no worse than what you put in . Ca n't say that about bonds , money markets , or stocks . Annuities can also be structured to give lifelong payouts , and include the lifespans of both you and your spouse . Having an income that you ca n't out live is also a big plus . They are passive investments , which means you do n't have to keep track of what they are doing , you buy and let them roll , or look at them once a year and adjust , if you decide to . The security of knowing you will be receiving a lifelong monthly payment is a huge part of financial peace of mind . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! The question is really not accurate though , it 's like asking why all dogs bite people . Not all dogs do , but the ones that do give them all a bad name . Are variable annuities bad ? They most certainly can be , if your risk tolerance is low , or your allocations made unwisely . Just like you would pick a dog that suits your needs and temperament , you should choose an annuity to suit you also . The risk in a variable annuity may not be right for you , but may suit someone else quite well . Please take the time to discuss what you are looking for with an agent that will listen , and take your concerns to heart . If they pressure you , or appear to be more interested in the sale than what you say , do n't buy , and send them packing . Annuities are not something that you can afford to buy without completely understanding what you 're buying . I hope that helps , please contact me if you need more information , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Lets use the analogy of living in a home . You basically have two choices : to buy , or to rent . Suppose you rent . Why would you do that ? First of all , you dont have to put any money up . Nor do you have to pay any real estate taxes . Nor do you have to pay for any maintenance . Its basically a cheap way to put a roof over your head . But , you always have the option to buy . Suppose now you buy . Why would you do that ? Equity . You have something to show for your money . Your home attains a monetary value that can be exploited . Of course , it costs more . But you get more . And you still get a roof over your head . This model is useful for understanding life insurance . Term insurance is like renting a home . Its a pretty cheap way to get the coverage you need . No equity , no added value . But you can convert it to a permanent policy . Whole life equates to buying a home . You pay more , but you get more . There is cash available for you to use , in addition to the survivor benefit for your heirs - that roof over your head . Make sense ?
Yes , annuities can be held in a trust and there are a number of reasons for why one might place an annuity into a trust . There are also a lot of reasons why one would be foolish to place an annuity into a trust so certain care should be made when it comes to approaching the use of trusts with annuities .
You dont have to bother if you dont have to . At least in this country for the time being , life insurance is not something that the government forces us to buy . And I hope the day never comes , because it would really mess up the life insurance marketplace . So the purchase of life insurance is voluntary . Who , then , should buy it ? If you are a billionaire , should you buy life insurance ? Sure you should . Lets suppose your estate would owe the government $ 100 million in taxes when you die . To pay this fee , your heirs might have to liquidate a bunch of businesses and buildings and other assets . They would then pay the bill dollar for dollar . Or , you could buy life insurance and pay the bill for pennies on the dollar . And keep all your assets intact as an inheritance for your heirs . Not only that : lets suppose you started a foundation to eliminate world hunger or some other noble cause . Lets suppose you wanted to leave the charity $ 100 million as a gift when you died . If you bought a life insurance policy and left that to the charity , you would only have to pay a few cents in premium for every dollar a benefit . You would have that much more money left over for other good causes . A very good use of your money . Now , lets suppose youre not a billionaire . Should you buy life insurance ? Heres the question : do you have a more economical way to take care of your family ? They have become dependent upon you . Why force them to reduce their standard of living when you die ? You could start putting money away into a fund . But what happens if you tragically died next year ? Would you have really accumulated enough money to let them live their lives ? Life insurance would provide them with all the money they need as soon as it is needed . No other financial product comes to the rescue like that . Why not die looking like a hero , as someone who cared and took measures to provide for his love ones ?
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why buy whole life for a child ? Well I guess I can tell you why I bought whole life for my kids . In no particular order or rank , I bought whole life because that is the cheapest if will ever be , those policies will become cornerstones of their financial lives . Much like buying a piece of property they now have something to build on . They have future guaranteed insurability with these policies as well What that means is they ca n't be told `` no '' by the insurance company , even if they are no longer insurable . Sort of like a stock option . And finally for this post if either of my kids were to die before me I would be devastated . I would be crushed as I have great kids . So insurance on them would help me get through their passing by paying bills that still need to be paid . I am planning for their future living with these policies and accepting the aspect of the possibility of their early passing and the help they would provide . I could never imagine having an argument with a spouse over what headstone to buy . Whole life on a child is an investment in their future , not just their death .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
David 's article is well written and the basic principles are the same in Canada , the design and tax regulations and advantages are of course very different . Accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- - your money invested is guaranteed Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIF -RRB- also referred to as segregated funds or variable annuities - your money is invested in equities and is not guaranteed . Since the products are issued under the insurance act they include maturity and death benefit guarantees , typically 75 % or 100 % . Payout annuities : You exchange a lump sum of money for a stream of payments for the rest of your life or for a specified number of years . Since they provide a guaranteed pension income they are often used by retirement income planners to cover fixed expenses . The guarantees , estate planning applications , potential creditor proofing and tax advantages are reasons why annuities are an important part of retirement planning . In Canada as in the USA , whether or not an annuity is right for you depends on your individual circumstances . Using an annuity strategy is not always complicated , it is however , often permanent . In most provinces in Canada , almost anyone can call themselves a Financial Adviser or Financial Planner . Look for an insurance broker with a professional designation like a Chartered Life Underwriter -LRB- CLU -RRB- or Certified Financial Planner -LRB- CFP -RRB- . Annuities are often used in combination to increase after tax income , guarantee income , address volatility , `` lock in '' gains , leave a legacy , ensure privacy and provide potential creditor protection . With their increased risk exposure protecting your retirement nest egg is of special importance if you are the self employed . You can find 16 `` I want to ... how do I '' examples at www.jpw.ca If you have further questions please contact me .
Why not buy whole life insurance ? Well , you know you 're right , why not ? It is the only policy you actually control , they ca n't take it away or price you out of it . They ca n't make changes without your permission , they ca n't really do anything because you control the policy . That is why whole life is more expensive than other types of coverage . The insurance company is giving up control to the insured , so would they price that low or high ? There are a ton of other reasons as well , but I want to keep this brief .
Why should you buy life insurance ? Maybe you should n't . If no one depends on you for income , if you will have no final expenses to bury or cremate you , if you do n't care about the person that might be stuck paying off your debt , then , do n't buy life insurance . Also , people that do not believe in insurance should n't buy it . In spite of the fact that owning an insurance policy is not a religious commitment , buying it might disrupt their value system and enrich an already wealthy insurance agent or insurance company . On the other hand , if you do care about anything other than yourself at all , you should consider buying it . Even a small face amount of life insurance is better than having none . It might provide you with some peace of mind as the gurney you are bleeding to death on is being rolled into the surgical unit .
Where to buy life insurance if purchased properly should be a guided purchase . Just to buy a policy usually winds up being a mistake in the future or at least when you run into an agent wanting to sell a policy then it becomes like the used car problem . Yours is wrong ! Persons who just buy life insurance in today 's life without any kind of knowledge or counseling is kind of following the idea that they know it all and need no knowledgeable assistance . The best solution to purchasing life insurance is to find a knowledgeable agent who can , through in depth research of your total financial needs , guide you and tell you the why 's of certain policies . There is no one policy that is better than all others for everyone . If you have an insurance agent that is really interested in you and your situation that individual will spend time with you without pushing for a quick sale . The real desire of that agent must be to be a mutually beneficial part of your life and the agent . The agent will educate you on the possibilities and the reason for different types of policies . Then , with your help , find something that will fit into your financial plan . You should have a total financial plan that you are working toward , consisting of a proper budget , proper life insurance , -LRB- and other insurance -RRB- , proper investments and investments that are balanced for long range safety and fit your own desires . Buying life insurance properly is far more complicated than buying a policy . Many just buy a policy and then blame someone else for the failure of that policy to do the job it was purchased for . Allen D. Mitchell , Ph.D. , CLU , FLMI Author , second edition `` The Prophets Dollar ''
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Is A Tax Qualified Long Term Care Insurance ?
Tax-qualified long-term care insurance -LRB- TQ -RRB- pays out a benefit to qualifying insureds that is not taxable as ordinary income . Virtually all long-term care insurance policies sold today are TQ . But , some carriers still sell policies that are non-tax qualified -LRB- NTQ -RRB- because such a policy does not come under the same regulation as a TQ policy . The argument by some is that with an NTQ policy it is easier for the insured to qualify for the payment of long-term care costs . The language of the NTQ policy may also be more generous with regard to benefits , features , and riders . Whether those factors would be worth the possible taxation of the benefits is debatable .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Qualified Long Term Care Insurance -LRB- TQ Long Term Care Insurance -RRB- is long term care insurance that has favorable tax treatment , as determined by the federal government in 1997 . Nearly all long term care policies sold now are qualified plans . It allows your premium and nonreimbursed benefits to be counted as a medical expense on your tax return , and allows you to receive long term care benefits tax free .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
P ayment of long-term care costs from a long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- policy may be taxable if one owns a `` non-qualified '' -LRB- NTQ -RRB- long-term care policy . There may be a few carriers out there that still sell them . However , most carriers exclusively sell only `` tax-qualified '' LTCi -LRB- TQ -RRB- policies , the payouts from which are not subject to being taxed as regular income . If one owns an NTQ policy , it is important to check to see if it was re-categorized TQ by the carrier . There was a period of time in the mid-90s in which coverage design for TQ policies was mandated , but NTQ policies sold prior to that time were allowed to become considered TQ if the policy owner requested it . For some carriers , it was an automatic retro-action . If in doubt , call the carrier 's claims department to determine the tax treatment of an LTCi policy sold before 1998 , even if the title page of the policy in question specifically states that it is `` not tax qualified '' . A definitive answer may not be given - one may be referred to a qualified tax professional for a final determination . Nothing in this answer is intended to be construed as tax advice . For a specific tax situation , go to www.irs.gov or consult with a qualified tax advisor .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Payments of long-term care claims by an insurance company are generally not taxable as regular income . However , the policy title page must clearly state that the policy is a `` tax-qualified long-term care insurance policy '' or `` TQ '' . Some carriers still sell `` non-tax-qualified '' long-term care policies -LRB- NTQ -RRB- in which the benefits may be taxable as regular income . The reasoning is that NTQ policies are more generous in qualifying someone to go on claim and that other policy features may provide a broader range of care . Whether those attributes would offset the possible taxation of the benefit is debatable . Most long-term care policies today are `` TQ '' .
The term `` qualified '' should really be `` tax-qualified '' . A tax-qualified long-term care insurance policy -LRB- TQ -RRB- is one that pays out benefits that are not subject -LRB- in most cases -RRB- to income taxation in the year that they are received by the policy owner . -LRB- See `` NOTE '' , below . -RRB- The benefits paid out froma `` non-qualified '' long-term care policy -LRB- NTQ -RRB- may be subject to income tax in the year that they are received . Policies purchased prior to 1998 should be reviewed by a qualified tax advisor for any questions about taxation of benefits . Legislation in 1996 allowed for federal exemption from benefit payout taxationfor policies purchased after a certain datethat metspecific requirements outlined in that legislation . NOTE : LTC insurance policies that payout their benefit as a cash amount -LRB- indemnity policies -RRB- may exceed the government-allowed limit on how much of that benefit can be considered `` tax-qualified '' . If you have one of those types of policies , consult with the carrier 's policy owner service unit to determine how your benefits might be paid out should you qualify for care . Some carriers will only payout a cash benefit up to the federally-mandated limit to avoid triggering a 1099 being sent to the IRS . But , it 's better to check than be surprised .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
A tax qualified long term care insurance plan is one that is able to have the premiums deducted as a medical expense , and benefits received income tax free . Tax qualified plans have some requirements in regard to triggers and what is offered , that non qualified plans do not . Most long term care insurance sold today is tax qualified -LRB- TQ -RRB- .
The premium and benefits for a Tax Qualified Long Term Care Insurance policy can be deducted on your tax return as a medical expense . TQ Long Term Care Insurance came about in 1997 with the introduction of HIPAA . Tax Qualified policies have a set of guidelines that must be met to be designated as TQ policies . Long Term Care policies purchased before 1997 were grandfathered in , despite not meeting those guidelines . Now , most of the Long Term Care Insurance sold in the US is TQ .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is Basis In Retirement Plan ?
Since a tax qualified plan defers taxation until money is withdrawn there is no cost basis . Or to put it another way the basis is $ 0 . All funds coming out will be taxed as ordinary income when received . If funds are rolled over to an IRA those funds when received will be taxed as ordinary income .
The term `` basis '' means the sum of your personal after tax contributions . If you have basis in an existing pension plan you will receive your basis back income tax free . You will only be taxed on pre-tax contributions and the interest earned . Poeple who have a non-contributory retirement plan do not have any basis in the plan .
An IRA is just one type of retirement plan . An IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Account -RRB- is specifically designed for individuals to save for retirement on a pre-tax basis . When funds are withdrawn at retirement they are then taxed . There is also an account called a ROTH IRA . This allows a person to save for retirement on an after-tax basis . When the funds are withdrawn at retirement they are then tax-free . An IRA is not the only type of retirement plan . There are many other employer based options .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
A Registered Retirement Plan is a plan that as the name suggests is designed for retirement savings . The usual attributes include deductibility of contributions and tax deferred grow while in the plan . Withdrawals from the plan are usually taxable . There are different types of plans available . In Canada for example , Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- are available on an individual or group basis . You can make the contributions for you own plan or to a plan for your spouse -LRB- It is an irrevocable gift -RRB- . Registered Pension Plans are also available with the employer making some or all of the contributions . In addition , the Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- does not offer tax deductibility of contributions , however the funds grow tax free and the withdrawals do not attract taxation . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The term `` basis '' means the sum of your personal after tax contributions . If you have basis in an existing pension plan you will receive your basis back income tax free . You will only be taxed on pre-tax contributions and the interest earned . Poeple who have a non-contributory retirement plan do not have any basis in the plan .
Non-qualified retirement plans are not sanctioned for the tax deduction like qualified plans are under ERISA . Non-qualified retirement plans generally use annuities and life insurance . Annuities can be used in qualified plans , but life insurance can not . Non-qualified and qualified retirement plans using annuities , for an example , accumulate tax deferred , but the basis of a non-qualified annuity is distributed free of taxation , whereas qualified annuities are fully taxable including basis .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
One way to maximize retirement savings is to take advantage of all tax deferred savings plans you are eligible for . Be sure and take advantage of any employer sponsored plans where the company is putting in on your behalf . Putting aside a fixed percentage of your earning on a regular basis allows the power of compound interest to work for you . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
If you leave the cash value in your policy , it grows tax deferred . If you take it out , or it is given to your beneficiary after death , the life insurance cash value that is below your policy 's `` basis '' is not considered taxable income . Cost basis is the premiums you paid into the policy , minus any dividends that may have been already paid to you . If cash value greater than basis is paid out , the amount above basis is taxable .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is a qualified `` cash or deferred arrangement '' permitted under section 401 -LRB- k -RRB- of the Internal Revenue Code . Essentially , a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a retirement plan sponsored by your employer that allows you to defer some of your income -LRB- subject to limits -RRB- into this plan . Some employers will provide matching contributions on top of your salary deferral which will help you to build retirement savings more quickly . By deferring income into a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan , you also defer paying taxes on that income . The investments inside of the plan grow on a tax-deferred basis , and you are responsible for taxes when you take the money out of the plan as income -LRB- during retirement -RRB- .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Help Pay For A Walk In Tub ?
Unfortunately , no , Medicare will not help pay for a walk-in tub . They are not considered to be a durable medical equipment -LRB- a DME -RRB- item . They 're generally viewed as a convenience item for an individual since they 're available to the general public and anyone who wants one can buy them .
Unfortunately , no , Medicare will not help pay for a walk-in tub . They are not considered to be a durable medical equipment -LRB- a DME -RRB- item . They 're generally viewed as a convenience item for an individual since they 're available to the general public and anyone who wants one can buy them .
No , walk in bath tubs are generally not considered durable medical goods and are therefore not covered under Medicare .
No , health insurance generally will not pay for a hot tub . I personally have never heard of a situation that would warrant a medical necessity for a private hot tub . Health insurance is designed to pay for Medically necessary costs and procedures . Unless your doctor can show the insurance company that a hot tub is a medically necessary item -LRB- which will be a hard fight -RRB- it will not be covered under any policy that I am aware of .
Homeowners insurance will cover a hot tub for the same perils of the policy as the rest of your property . If the hot tub is connected to your home this would fall in as part of your dwelling coverage . If the hot tub is free standing outside then this would fall under other structure coverage .
No . Your health insurance will not cover a hot tub . If you are trying to purchase a hot tub , you would be responsible for paying 100 % of the cost out of your own pocket . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A flood which isdefinedby FEMA WEBSITELINK s not covered by renters insurance or any property insurance for that matter . Aseparateflood policy must be purchased to protect yourself from this peril . However if a pipe bursts in the home or water overflows from a tub or sink there may be coverage . Talk to your local agent about specifcoverageof your renters policy .
As long as were not talking about a flood your homeowners insurance policy will cover most water damage . Damage would include for example but not limited to a water or steam pipe suddenly bursting and damaging your dwelling . Wind driven rain would be another example or even overflow of tub , toilet , sink , or washer . The damage must be sudden and accidental .
You never have to accept the offer of an insurance adjuster . Most claims are paid on depreciated value . If replacement cost coverage is elected it covers only buildings and contents . Many things are specifically excluded . It appears that your adjuster does not consider your hot tub as a covered item for replacement coverage . That is his opinion .
Generally speaking , the coverage provided by a Tenants ' Policy is vey similar to that provided by a Homeowners ' Policy . The main difference is that with regard to property coverage , a Renters ' Policy protects YOUR belongings while a Homeowners ' protectes both the home and personal property . Remember that someone else owns your building or unit so they would have coverage for their interests . Water camage is a covered peril in both , though there can certainly be some differences . In a Renters Policy , if rain comes in through an open window , the damage caused to your couch , for example would be covered by your policy . If on the other hand , you made a mistakle and left the water running in the tub and it overflowed , not only would your policy provide coverage for your damages , but the liability portion would provide coverage for your landlord 's interest .
I believe that the best way to start is by talking with your Insurance Professional . You will need to provide the property location of course , but also some additional basic information . Things like the year of construction and type of home -LRB- Ranch , Colonial , Contemporary , for example -RRB- . Additional information like the size and style of the home , for example , is it standard construction or custom ? Is the home alarmed and are their special features like a finished basement , fire places , or special fixtures like a jacuzzi tub or sauna as examples . Let your Insurance Professional know also if you know of any recent upgrades to things like electrical , plumbing or heating/air conditioning systems or if a new roof has recently been put on as these may earn discounts if the home is older .
That is a great question ! You sound like many of the people who found themselves between a rock and a hard place when it came to health insurance . Employers do n't offer dental , because of its expense to them , and if you earn too much , CHIPS and Medicaid are unavailable . Did you look into the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- exchange for the dental policies ? The enrollment period is over , but go to the site www.healthcare.gov and walk through the steps to see if you can still qualify to get a plan . There 's a good chance that you qualify for a subsidy -LRB- hurry , before the Supreme Court decides on undoing them -RRB- to help pay for it . You can also find out whether you can get yourselves and the kids covered by the CHIPS or Medicaid programs . I walked through it using an example of 35 year old parents with two kids , and they qualified on earnings of $ 24,000 a year . The site is user friendly , and quick to tell you whether you qualify . If you need help , contact me and I 'll help you walk through it , okay ? Good luck , and thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! The best thing to do is go to the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- website , www.healthcare.gov and walk through the questions to see if you qualify . Start by entering your zip code and county , and follow the very simple prompts . It will tell you if you qualify for a policy . There are several qualifying events - gaining or losing a spouse or child , losing a job or income , moving out of a previously covered area , losing your coverage , even gaining citizenship or being released from incarceration . Give it a shot , and if you need help , feel free to click on my profile and contact me , I 'd be happy to walk through it with you . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
You obviously have access to a computer because you submitted this question . You can get quotes online direct with many carriers . Many independent insurance agencies have quote engines on their websites that will quote your coverage with multiple companies . However , these online solutions tend to be pretty much `` self-service '' . If you are looking more for someone to advise you and walk you through the steps of purchasing car insurance , then you seek out a licensed insurance agent in your are to walk you through the process . The agent will give you expert advice at no additional no charge to you .
The world is full of places to buy life insurance . Take a walk from your home down to your local business district . You will probably pass your landscaper . There are some companies that employ laborers , clergymen , and folks in all walks of life as part-time insurance agents . Drop into your bank . In all likelihood they have somebody trained to sell the product . Stop off by your stockbroker . Same thing . Want to have a cup of coffee with your accountant ? She could very well be licensed to sell life insurance , or affiliated with a brokerage that does . Perhaps you want to drop into your local retail chain . They could be hawking policies . Come back and check your mail . Probably some offers there . Log onto the Internet . You could choose from hundreds of websites from dozens of marketing companies . It seems rather far-fetched , doesnt it , that all these various people could really have the product knowledge , underwriting expertise , industry contacts , marketplace experience , and professionalism needed to satisfy their clients ? The good news is that the life insurance salesperson is available to work with you . This person has the special skills needed to help you make an intelligent choice about this very special product . When you make the right choice , your entire financial portfolio has a firm foundation . When you make the wrong choice , the whole portfolio can collapse . Theres a lot at stake when you buy this product . That is why you need the best possible advice and counsel you can get . The people in my profession provide it .
When ambulation and ADL 's are concerned , there are two ways the life insurance companies determine eligibility . One is whether the person can walk and take care of himself without assistance , including a wheelchair . The other is whether the person can walk and take care of himself without assistance of another person . To my knowledge , persons with quadriplegia nearly always rely on another person for at least some of their daily routines . So they would be restricted to guaranteed life insurance , which has a minimum age requirement of 40 + . However , it is good to know the criteria , as some disabled persons can get more coverage , and at a younger age , than guaranteed issue policies offer .
Great question ! There are many , many companies that offer life insurance policies . What you want to look for is a company that is well rated , -LRB- AM Best , Standard & Poors for example are companies that rate insurance companies on their financial stability -RRB- , has been around a while , and is well respected . I recommend that you find a local independent agent -LRB- one who is not tied to a specific brand , and so can write for several companies -RRB- who can help you find the company that offers the product that is the best fit for you . There are several kinds of policies , and uses for them , so having someone that you can trust to walk you through the process is a huge help . If you would like to contact me , I 'd be happy to help you with some more specific to your needs information . I 'd be glad to help . Thanks for asking !
Yes , Medicare will pay for a quad cane if it is prescribed by a doctor as medically necessary for support in walking . An exception might be if you were using a walker and went `` backwards '' to using a cane . Medicare will not pay for a downgrade like that , but would pay for an upgrade -LRB- e.g. single point cane upgrade to quad cane -RRB- .
Great question ! The short answer is the one that fits the following criteria : Solves my need , is affordable , and covers the time frame I 'll need it for . A term policy may be better for some needs than a whole life policy may be . They are typically much cheaper , but do n't cover as long as a whole life policy would . I would recommend that you find an agent that will take the time to sit down with you , and walk you through the process and help you find what is right for you . If you need help , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help you . Thanks for asking !
Great question ! One of the biggest changes from the Affordable Care Act was the shelving of the `` pre-existing condition '' exception that health insurers used to deny coverage . They are no longer allowed to deny you coverage . That does n't mean that all plans cover all things equally though , so I would recommend that you find a good agent to help walk you through the process to find a policy that is a good fit for you . A bonus ? The Act also eliminated lifetime caps on benefits . If you need help , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Much Does Medicare Pay For Physical Therapy ?
Medicare Part B pays 80 % for physical therapy . You can get a Medicare Supplement or Medicare Advantage Plan which will pick up some , or all , of the remaining 20 % . It 's probably a good idea to have this type of coverage , because the 20 % you may owe ... on physical therapy as well as other treatments ... can become quite expensive .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Yes . Medicare Part B does provide coverage for physical therapy , but there are cap limits for therapy services - $ 1,920 for physical therapy -LRB- cap for services combined with speech-language therapy -RRB- . If the services are deemed medically necessary -LRB- and documented -RRB- by your therapist , you would not be responsible for costs above the $ 1,920 cap . If you 're getting physical therapy services that are not medically necessary , then Medicare will not pay for the services . Medicare would be paying for approximately 80 % of the costs and you would be responsible for the other 20 % , after the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay the Part B deductible and the 20 % costs for physical therapy services .
According to the 2014 Medicare and You handbook distributed by CMS , physical therapy is a limited Medicare approved item . Medicare covers an evaluation and treatment for any injury or disease that changes your ability to function -LRB- provided a doctor approves your need for physical therapy -RRB- . There may be a limit on the amount Medicare will pay for physical therapy services in a single year . Most Medigap Plans will pay the remaining 20 % that Original Medicare does not pay for Medicare approved physical therapy .
Medicare does indeed cover physical therapy , occupational therapy and speech therapy . Medicare does impose limits on how much they will pay . Apparently at some point they think you have had enough and need to suck it up . In 2013 the limits are $ 1900 for physical and speech therapy combined . OT limits are $ 1900 . I told my doctor I broke my leg in two places . He told me to quit going to those places . Ba-da-bing
Physican therapy is covered under Medicare Part B , but there are cap limits for therapy services - $ 1,920 for physical therapy -LRB- cap for services combined with speech-language therapy -RRB- . If the services are deemed medically necessary -LRB- and documented -RRB- by your therapist , you would not be responsible for costs above the $ 1,920 cap.If you 're getting physical therapy services that are not medically necessary , then Medicare will not pay for the services . Medicare would be paying for approximately 80 % of the costs and you would be responsible for the other 20 % , after the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay the Part B deductible and the 20 % costs for physical therapy services .
MediGap Plan F policies are designed to pick up the 20 % that Medicare does n't cover in exchange for a monthly premium . The plans are standardized and are required to cover all of the approved services covered by Medicare Parts A & B. Physical Therapy is considered an outpatient rehabilitative service . This category is a Medicare covered benefit which includes Occupational Therapy , Physical Therapy , Speech and Language Therapy .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Does Health Insurance Cover Therapy ? It depends on the type of therapy . Most quality group plans will cover physical , physiological or other types of therapy . If you have an individual health plan pre-2014 I would check your benefit details , because many of the old policies did not cover therapy . Post-2014 plans tend to have stronger coverage . Request your summary of benefits and Coverage to see how the specific therapy treatment is covered under your benefits . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
Medicare Part B pays 80 % for physical therapy . You can get a Medicare Supplement or Medicare Advantage Plan which will pick up some , or all , of the remaining 20 % . It 's probably a good idea to have this type of coverage , because the 20 % you may owe ... on physical therapy as well as other treatments ... can become quite expensive .
Medicare can pay for nursing care at home under certain conditions . 1 -RRB- The patient must require only intermittent -LRB- part time -RRB- skilled care . If you need 24 hours skilled nursing care , Medicare will not cover those services provided in your home . 2 -RRB- You must be ordered to receive speech therapy , physical therapy , or occupational therapy . 3 -RRB- You must be certified as homebound . 4 -RRB- All the services must be documented as needed and provided by Medicare providers .
The heart of answering your question is your answer to the following question-for what condition or treatment do you need physical therapy ? Did your health insurance cover that need ? Have you reviewed your insuranc e policy to see what it states the coverage limitations for physical therapy ? Be on the safe side and call your company and ask them the question and they should be able to answer your question
There are three levels of Nursing Care , Skilled , Intermediate , and Custodial . Skilled Nursing care requires that you need the services of a licensed professional and that your health can improve by utilizing those services . For example , physical therapy , occupational therapy , and speech therapy would fall under those categories . Custodial Care means that you are not going to improve . You just need the assistance of others to perform certain activities of daily living . Medicare only pays for Skilled Nursing and is limited to 100 days .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
Generally , the answer would be no . Aetna -LRB- or any other major medical carrier -RRB- does not cover gym memberships . There may be plans available that have add-on -LRB- non-insurance -RRB- benefits such as travel discounts or gym memberships , but a true major medical health insurance plan will usually not pay for routine gym memberships . In some instances a carrier may agree to pay for a gym membership if the individual needs a type of physical therapy -LRB- such as swimming -RRB- that is more economical than traditional therapy sessions .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Medicare The Same As Health Insurance ?
Yes , Medicare is health insurance . It has some differences from privately purchased health insurance , or health insurance provided through an employer . The contractual coverages all depend on the plan , and the same is true with Medicare coverage . There are copays and deductibles , just like with health insurance . The biggest difference is the cost .
Medicare is a type of health insurance available to those over the ge of 65 and people with disabilities that have received social security income for more than 24 months . Coverage on Medicare works differently than traditional health insurance one is used to before joining the Medicare system , though many aspects are the same . Medicare has four parts , A -LRB- hospital coverage , the part that is `` premium free , '' for those who worked at least 40 quarters before becoming eligible -RRB- , B -LRB- outpatient coverage , which has a monthly premium , currently $ 115 for most -RRB- , C -LRB- Medicare Advantage , which replaces A and B -RRB- , and D -LRB- optional prescription drug coverage -RRB- .
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Let me start by saying that Medigap isnt the same as Part B but lets get a better understanding of how Medicare works . If you look at page 17 of the 2015 Medicare and You book you will see there are 2 main choices on how you can get your Medicare coverage . There is Original Medicare that includes Part A and B with the option to fill in the gaps in Original Medicare by buying a Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Or there is Medicare Advantage Plan , Part C , which include Part A , Part B and in most cases Part D. On page 92 of the Medicare and You book you will find that all Medigap policies are standardized . All polices offer that same basic benefits but different insurance companies may charge you different premiums for the same exact policy . Its a good idea to use a good broker that represents multi companies that can show you not only the price difference but also the average rate increases because all Medigap policies go up every year . Now there are different Medigap plans A-N , the easiest way to think about this is like car insurance . You can buy a car insurance policy with no deductible but by doing so your premium will be higher . If you choose to assume some of the risk , buying a policy with a deductible your premium will be lower . As long as youre in fairly good health -LRB- no major illnesses or recent hospitalization with in the last 2 years -RRB- you can show the market for the lowest price , remember Medigap plans always have a price increase each year and its always a wise decision to shop around every couple of years to find the best price . I am aware of one insurance company that once you are approved , will allow you to change between plans without re-looking at your current health , which may be a viable option if you want to save money with a higher deductible while you are in good health and then when your health starts to change you change your plan to a lower deductible . If you have any other question feel free to contact me for a phone review or we can chat on Skype .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Supplement in Florida is affordable , but the specific rates depend on four factors : Where you live , your current age , male or female , and smoker or non-smoker . The rates are standardized , and the ability to change from one Medicare Supplement to another requires that you are approved through health underwriting . When you are turning 65 and looking for a Medicare Supplement , you have an open enrollment opportunity , with no health underwriting considerations at all . The most important thing to remember is that the plan that you picked when you turned 65 is not , necessarily , the plan you should stick with for the rest of your life . The rates go up with all companies and at different speeds . Your agent should be shopping the market for you at each and every anniversary of your policy . You should also pick an independent agent , as opposed to an agent that works for only one company . The difference in the premium offered by an agent that only works for AARP or Mutual of Omaha , vs. a broker that can bring any and all carriers , can be a difference of $ 100 per month or more . This is for the same , exact , standardized Medicare Supplement plan . All of the plans are the same - a Plan F with one carrier has the same benefits and providers that accept it , as the Plan F with the other companies . The only difference is the price . See your `` Medicare & You '' guidebook where it says this exact same thing . My agency has saved seniors over $ 1 million in premium since we 've been in business . Typically , the savings are $ 600 per year when we are shopping a plan from where they were with their old carrier . Again , demand that your agent shop these plans for you every year . Your doctor does not care what name is on the insurance card , or how much you paid in premiums . He or she is still going to give you great care . You should get the most insurance for the money , and with Medicare Supplement insurance in Florida , there is a great difference in the premiums for Medicare Supplement insurance .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Well , itapparently depends upon what sex your significant other is . If you are a man and woman living together in a committed relationship but not married , unless your employer 's policy allows for coverage in such situations then theanswer is generally `` No '' and it appears it will be that way going forward . If , however , you are a same sex couple in a committed relationship then in some states this is already accepted . And , a March 14 , 2014 announcement from Health and Human Services will essentially require all health plans that offer coverage for married heterosexual couples to do so for same sex couples married in a jurisdiction that recognizes same sex marriages . This requirement goes into effect on January 1 , 2015 but the Obama administration is encouraging employers to voluntarily comply with this rule before then . Larger , self-insured employers had already been operating under similar rules issued by the Department of Labor last fall . Of course , not every state recognizes same sex marriages . So , you still need to do some homework on your particular situation in your state of residence and the individual or group health insurance contracts issued there . I can see where the need for a domestic partnership agreement will be a good idea in some states but clearly the requirements for health insurance plans regulated under the Affordable Care Act have moved to recognize same sex marriage as being on a par with heterosexual marriage . But a couple just living together with no formal legal commitments , regardless of sexual orientation , would appear to be much more problematic and that kind of `` significant other '' would probably not meet the requirements of being a legitimate dependent under the law .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- are good plans if you are in good health and not using a lot of medical services . In Alabama where I practice MA Plans have high out of pocket cost for people with serious or chronic health problems , as much as $ 6700 in a calendar year . The problem I see with MA Plans is that people start out using them when they are in good health but once your health changes and you have to use your MA Plan more and more you become unhappy with your out of pocket cost for Medicare covered services . If you become unhappy with your MA Plan and want to switch to a Medicare Supplement you may not be able to if you have serious health problems or you may pay a much higher premium because of your health . My professional recommendation is to get a Medicare Supplement even if you are in good health because you need a Medicare Health Plan that not only meets your needs today but will continue to meet your needs as you get older and your health care needs change . If you wait until you need a Medicare Supplement because your health has changed you may not be able to . Insurance companies that offer Medicare Supplement Plans can and do turn down people that have serious pre-existing health conditions .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I do n't know what a lot of doctors think about Humana . Humana offers Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C of Medicare -RRB- . Part C allows insurance companies like Humana to provide Medicare benefits . They are managed health care plans such as HMOs and PPOs . Since they are managed care plans they have networks -LRB- doctor and hospital -RRB- where they want you to receive your medical care . Medicare Advantage Plans must offer the same benefits as Original Medicare but they do not have to cover every benefit the same way . These plans can have higher out-of-pocket costs than Medicare for some benefits and are required to limit out-of-pocket cost to no more than $ 6,700 in a calendar year . Some doctors may not like to work with Humana for their Medicare patients and would prefer to use Original Medicare plus a Supplement .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does Group Universal Life Insurance Work ?
Group Universal Life is offered to employees by businesses . Some employers pay for the coverage ; in other businesses , the insurance is voluntary and paid for solely by employees . Group Universal Life Insurance policies -LRB- GULP -RRB- are permanent and can accumulate cash value . As such , they are usually portable , so that employees can take their coverage with them when they leave their jobs .
Video Transcript : What is group life insurance ? In many businesses , some of the employer benefit packages include universal life , and that 's in a group scenario . It 's going to look ... generally , that 's going to be priced at simplified issues , sometimes even guaranteed issue . The cool thing about universal life as a permanent form of life insurance , it can accumulate cash value and you could use it as a supplemental retirement plan or use if for its coverage benefit . When you 're looking at group , instead of just term insurance which is traditionally group cases , many people are now looking at permanent forms of life insurance , this one being universal life , as part of a group benefit package . When you look at this , this is a pretty good idea because you 're going to have to pay up a little bit of economic tax on this , about $ 50,000 of death benefit , because you 're really gaining a benefit . To me , that 's pretty worth it because wherever you have to pay a little bit in taxation for the benefit , you 're not really putting this out on your hand . Depending upon if your employer is paying it or depending upon if you 're paying it , it really is still a pretty good idea . You have permanent coverage based on all these lives on a group case and you have a little bit of cash value accumulating in this . It 's great for supplemental retirement income . You can look at universal life as a double-edge ; a way of protecting assets , protecting your life , as well as having some income later on .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The same companies that carry Term Life Insurance often carry Universal Life Insurance , and most agencies that sell Term also sell UL . When purchasing online , you will want to work with a licensed agent who has some experience , so they will understand the in 's and out 's of Universal Life . There are several types of Universal Life Insurance . Guaranteed UL allows you to lock in a level premium that will guarantee the policy to pay the death benefit to a certain age . This guarantee might be 20 years from now ; it might be to age 121 , or something different . It is important to select a guarantee to avoid the problems Universal Life presented in the past , when people bought while interest rates were high , and their policies started lapsing much earlier than anticipated when interest rates dropped . There are also many Universal Life policies that do not have `` no lapse '' guarantees . How long your coverage last relies on what the interest rate and cost of insurance are at any given time . Variable Universal Life allows you to invest in the stock market , with the potential for more growth -LRB- and more loss -RRB- than other UL policies . Indexed Universal Life allows you to take advantage of some modest gains by allocating premium to equity index accounts . While it does not have as much cash growth potential as VUL , it has much more protection from losses . Added to these are Survivor Universal Life policies off all types . These cover two people , and pay when the second person dies . Again , you 'll want to use an experienced agent when you buy UL . There are many knowledgeable agents on this website who can help you .
There are five types of permanent life insurance policies : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Participating whole life and guaranteed universal life are used for indemnification planning . Participating whole life , with a max term rider and paid up additions rider can be used for income as can current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . The income design must conform to TAMRA and minimize the death benefit amount to optimize the crediting methodology .
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
There are two types of life insurance : Term and Permanent life insurance . Term life insurance is for a time certain period of coverage to indemnify your beneficiaries from financial liability . Permanent life insurance is for ongoing financial liabilities that may never terminate . Depending upon your age term life insurance issues at guaranteed periods of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life insurances can mature up to age 121 and some polices actually isle the life of the insured . Permanent life insurance can be classified into two categories : Par whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life has four policy platforms : Guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life .
Flexible premium adjustable life is the more antiquated title of universal life . Today , there are four different universal life polices. : current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . These three is feature the flexibility or adjust-ability of premiums and death benefit amounts . Guaranteed universal life , in general terms , does not have this flexible feature based on it 's secondary guarantees .
If you buy universal life insurance that offers a lifetime guaranteed level premium and level death benefit , there are few cons to universal life insurance . With those guarantees , it is a permanent policy , so it will usually have a higher premium than term . But it often has a lower premium than whole life . Also , guaranteed no lapse universal life policies do not usually have a lot of cash value , but for many people , that is a worthy trade off for the lower premium . If you get a universal life policy without guarantees , you need to be careful that your policy does not lapse before you want it to . If you purchase indexed universal life or variable universal life , you also need to manage the investments made within your policy . The con would be that many people assume their agent is managing their policy for them , and are dismayed when coverage ends or they have very little cash value to show for their years of premiums . If you understand your policy well and know how to manage it , being able to manage your own policy can be a pro rather than a con .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
While both universal life and whole life insurance are permanent products and have a death benefit the similarities end there . Whole life insurance has a guarantee premium for the life of the contract and generally is credited by a dividend or return of unused premium . Universal life gas four policy types : current assumption universal life , guaranteed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . With the exception of guaranteed universal life , the others have flexible premiums or death benefit that can be changed by the policy owner .
You should only be dealing with group underwriting if your group has more than 50 employees or you are considering a self-funded group health plan . The employees in your group will have to complete an application form and answer a variety of medical questions regarding various health conditions and prescription drug usage . These forms are then submitted for underwriting where an underwriter takes into consideration what health conditions exist in the group -LRB- diabetes , cancer , pregnancies , expensive maintenance drugs , etc. -RRB- and then makes a determination if the originally quoted rates for your group will generate enough premium to cover the average expected risk plus the now disclosed risks in your group . For example , if based on the census of your group the male to female ratio and average age in the group indicated a need for $ 20,000 per month in premium to cover the expected risk and overhead associated with your group you would start out with an proposal costing $ 240,000 annually . It is assumed there will be a certain average amount of health care consumption in your group based solely on the factors I 've described above . If , however , your group has risks in it that go beyond what is standardly assumed should exist -LRB- you have a large number of diabetics or some pregnancies in the pipleline or an ongoing cancer case for examples -RRB- then the underwriter will `` adjust '' the originally quoted rates to reflect the need for more premium to cover these higher than anticipated medical expenses . So , if the underwriter determines that your group is more likely to cost $ 300,000 in medical expenses and overhead rather than $ 220,000 as originally quoted , the underwriter will return a `` counter offer '' with a 36 % rate adjustment -LRB- $ 300K / $ 220K -RRB- to accept your group at its real risk level .
It depends on the contract with your employer . Sometimes employers offer group life insurance with cash value build up ; Universal Life or Variable Universal Life . Generally speaking most employers only offer group term life insurance . Something is better than nothing . Having group life insurance with cash value can be a nice benefit for employees looking for tax deferral alternatives to 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans .
Group Universal Life insurance is a flexible , permanent type of life insurance policy offered by employers to employees at group rates . Universal Life should be a portable plan , because the purpose of Universal Life is to last beyond a few years , and keep for the rest of your life , if possible . It can offer employees death benefit protection along with the opportunity to grow cash values tax deferred .
Universal Life Insurance is good for persons who are looking for a low cost permanent policy that does not accumulate cash value . That is called guaranteed universal life . On the other hand , universal life can be good for people wanting to build up an accumulation of money to `` borrow from themselves '' on a tax favorable basis in retirement . That is called indexed universal life or variable universal life . Universal life is flexible , so is also good for people who want one policy to simply adjust during their lifetime .
It depends on the insurer as to what Adjustable Life is . There were a couple of midwestern companies who had products with that moniker which were fixed premium adjustable life insurance products . Universal Life one of the dominant forms of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life which is the official name of the product . So , it may be that you are asking about Universal Life . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
Group health insurance is a health insurance policy or plan -LRB- depending upon how it is funded -RRB- that is provided by an employer for its employees or through an organization such as a labor union for its members . In a group health insurance policy situation the employer is the actual policy holder and its employees and covered dependents are subscribers who receive a certificate of coverage . In this context the employee 's health insurance is tied to their place of employment and while -LRB- depending upon the size of the group -RRB- there are state and federal laws that allow for an ex-employee to continue their coverage through the group plan for some defined period of time , eventually a former employee will lose access to their ex-employer 's group plan and have to replace it coverage from a new employer or individual health insurance . With the latest round of implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- effective January 1 , 2014 group health insurance is in many ways more complicated than ever before . For instance , employers in the 2 to 50 employee market segment in the vast majority of statesnow operate in a community rated situation and are finding that new benefit plan designs are being presented to them that may differ significantly from their current rate structures and plan designs . Fully insured ACA compliant health plans for the 2 to 50 market segment are now guaranteed to be issued , are not subject to underwriting and can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods -LRB- just to highlight some of the most major changes -RRB- . Larger sized groups , while they are certainly impacted by the effects of the ACA , are still operating under a mix of the old rules and the new ones . So , right now groups with 51 + employees are still subject to underwriting , though the new ACA rules will be migrating up the ladder to apply to groups in the 51 to 99 employee range in the future . There will be groups who will be winners and losers under the requirements of the ACA and depending upon the composition of the group and its average income levels for its workforce , some employers may find that providing group health insurance is no longer in the best financial interest of many of their employees when compared with the subsidized individual health insurance that many of their employees could qualify for . If you are an employer faced with these issues and are looking for experienced guidance on these matters please feel free to contact me for a consultation .
Life Insurance is a mortality product constructed to cover temporary -LRB- term insurance -RRB- or permanent -LRB- permanent insurance -RRB- financial liabilities . Is your financial liability temporary or perpetual ? Term life insurance is generally offered in increments of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life polices can cover you to age 121 and has five policy types : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . There are three major planning categories for life insurance : indemnification , income and inheritance . First , determine which planning category you need . If the planning category is indemnification and/or inheritance then determine is the need temporary or permanent ? The solution is either term or guaranteed universal life insurance . If the planning category is income , life insurance can be a supplemental retirement alternative . Here 's some product alternatives : current assumption universal life insurance with three crediting methods : interest rates , indices and separate sub account performance using the lowest TAMRA compliant death benefit option . For income , you may also want to look at TAMRA compliant lowest death benefit , participating whole life , with a max term rider and a paid up additions rider .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Is Term Life Insurance For 30 Years ?
To find the cost of term life insurance for 30 years , you can go to a website that offers quotes online . If `` instant '' quotes are offered , you can change the amount and term length and compare the cost of different policies . The cost of 30 year term life insurance is higher than the cost for shorter terms , but it is locked in for 30 years at the health rating you are now . So that can save you lots of money in the long run .
30 year term life insurance is priced based on the age and health of the insured . In order to better answer this question , these two pieces of information would be necessary . You can contact an agent with this information to receive a free quote so you 'll know the cost of 30 year quote .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
There is no set guideline to how much you should pay for Term Life Insurance . There are general guidelines . E.g. . If you take a 10 year term policy , you should pay less than you would pay for a 30 year term policy . If the rates are similar you are much better off locking that rate in for 30 years . Another general guideline would be , if you can get a permanent policy for a price just slightly higher than term , take the permanent policy . Sometimes Universal Life rates run close to Term rates at older ages , especially if the UL rates are locked in to age 90 or 95 . Universal Life is much more flexible than Term , so if you can get it for a similar price , go for it . Aside from generalities , no one can predict how much you should pay for a term life insurance policy because life insurance rates are based on your age , sex , tobacco status , and health . You can check out an instant quote engine on internet websites to get an idea of what term rates might run for you . But you need to call the agency to get a more accurate rate .
When you buy life insurance to cover a mortgage , you can buy your policy in the face amount and term length that you want . Often , that is 30 year term to cover a 30 year mortgage . About 20 years down the road you may have half your mortgage paid off . At that time you could reduce your life insurance policy to half the face amount and save some money . Or you could start out taking half of your coverage in 30 year Term and half in 20 year Term . Buying the shorter term policy will save you some money and when it runs out , you still have 10 years of coverage left . All this is to say , you really ca n't know how much mortgage life insurance costs until you talk to an agent and figure out the best way to set up your policy . Give someone who sells level Term life insurance today ; you will be glad you took the time .
I would not say that whole life is better than term life . It really depends on the clients need for life insurance . Whole life insurance name is literal , it is a face amount of life insurance that will last your whole life at a fixed premium . It is typically more expensive than term when your young therefore the face amount is typically less than a term insurance counter part . It is however much more affordable in later years because of the fixed rate . Term life insurance is typically more affordable in younger years with a fixed time period of level premiums such as 5-10-15-20-30-35 years . Term life insurance is used to cover a time period of debt such a mortgage . For example you purchase a home with a $ 250,000 mortgage for 30 years . It would be prudent to purchase a $ 250,000 30 year term policy as well . Try to avoid mortgage life insurance unless you are uninsurable . This term is known as decreasing term life and reduces as the mortgage is repaid . With straight term life , your loved ones will receive the difference of the face amount instead of the insurance company .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
A Term life insurance policy is one that will have the same premium for a set number of the years in the term . Some Term life insurance will guarantee that the premium will not go up for the entire term ; other Term life insurance will guarantee that the premium can not go up for part of the term . E.g. 30 year Term life may be guaranteed not to go up in price for the full 30 years , or it can be guaranteed not to go up for 20 of the 30 years and `` hope '' that it wo n't go up the last 10 years . Term life insurance does not have any cash value . If you quit paying on Term life , it will end after one month .
By life insurance money , I assume that you mean the money the insurance company pays to your beneficiary ? It comes from your and everyone else 's premiums . Think about it . If one thousand young healthy 30-year olds buy a 30-year level term life insurance policy , all of them pay premiums for 30-years . But how many of them do you think will actually die during that 30-years ? One or two of them . Those are the only ones that will get anything back from the insurance company . The premiums from all 1,000 times 30-years will pay the death benefit for the one or two that die .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Term life insurance is intended to cover needs that have a set time period . E.g. . A 30 year mortgage can be protected by purchasing a 30 year Term life insurance policy . So you can determine how much Term life insurance you should have by looking at the need to be covered . E.g. if your mortgage is for $ 200,000 , taking out a 30 year Term policy of $ 250,000 -LRB- enough to cover the mortgage plus misc other expenses that would be incurred upon death -RRB- would be a good amount to purchase for that particular need . Figuring this out for each temporary need , then lumping them together in the length of policy needed , can be a cost effective way to buy Term life insurance .
A Return of Premium Life Insurance policy will pay back all the premiums you paid in if you are still alive when the years of the term are ended . E.g. if you took out a $ 250,000 thirty year term policy on your 40th birthday with an annual premium of $ 500 , on your 70th birthday you would get a tax free check for $ 15,000 -LRB- the policy may exclude paying back policy fees or other minor variations , but that is the gist of it -RRB- . You could keep the cash or may even be able to roll the $ 15,000 over into a single premium permanent policy with a higher value . In this example , you could have had a $ 250,000 term policy to cover a 30 year mortgage , and if you had passed in that 30 years , your house would have been paid off . But if you outlive the 30 year term , you still end up with a final expense fund or policy . Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- term often will pay back part of the premiums paid in if the policy is kept for a shorter period than the entire term , as well . The initial price for ROP Term is higher than for regular Term life insurance . And , contrary to the premiums for regular Term insurance -LRB- which are usually higher the longer the term -RRB- , ROP Term policies usually cost LESS the longer the term is . That is because the insurance company hangs onto your money longer and thus is able to return more to you after those years have passed .
There is no such thing as best life insurance to buy . It all depends on your need and your stage in life . If you are in your 20s and 30s then a whole life policy may be appropriate since it tends to be more affordable in this state of your life . In your 40s and 50s a 30 year term may make much sense when a retirement investment is also created to parallel to term life so that if the policy expires in your 70s or 80s , your retirement savings will take care of burial cost in the invent of death . Remember always contact your financial advisor before you act . One thing to remember about whole life is that your premium goes to two places : Insurance and investment . Lets say you are paying $ 160 per month for whole life policy . $ 100 may go towards your insurance and $ 60 may into an investment account that yields some interest . Let say you purchased a face amount $ 500,000 and you were aged 30 when you bought it . Forty years latter at age 70 your saving has generated about $ 400,000 . If you die , your beneficiary will receive the insurance face amount of $ 500,000 but not the $ 400,000 in saving/investment account , That amount remains with the insurance company . You can withdraw your $ 400,000 as a loan while you are alive and has to paid back to the insurance company . If it is not paid then your insurance face amount will be reduced by loan balance upon your death . In short your beneficiary will receive $ 100,000 upon your death . Term life insures you only for a fix number of years usually 10,20 or 30 and policy expires or renews at a much higher rate You may also become un insurable at policy expiration . Remember to talk to your financial adviser
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Term length in life insurance means the number of years that the policy will stay in effect at the same premium . E.g. . A 10 year Term policy will stay at the same price for 10 years ; a 30 year Term policy is assumed to stay at the same price for 30 years . However , some policies will guarantee that the premium stays the same for part of the term and does not guarantee that it will stay the same for the remainder of the term . It is important to make sure that your premium is guaranteed not to go up for the entire term , whether that be 10 , 20 , 30 years or some other term length .
The reason that life insurance premiums go up with age is because mortality rates go up the longer someone lives . When someone buys a 10 year term life insurance policy at age 20 , the rates will not be much higher than at age 30 , because the death rate for 30-40 year old persons does not vary much . However , the rates for a 10 year term policy will be much higher for a 60 year old person than a 50 year old person , because mortality rates go up a lot between ages 60-70 , especially for men .
For most budget conscience consumers , 30 year term life insurance with a conversion provision is the best bang for the buck on affordable life insurance . I choose 30 years because many consumers have mortgagees that last that long . I recommend term insurance with conversion provisions to maintain the option to convert to permanent life insurance if its deemed necessary . Make sure the permanent policies are worth converting to before you purchase term life insurance . Remember , the key issue is affordability . Guaranteed term life insurance can be purchased for guaranteed periods starting at 5 to 30 years . Guaranteed term life insurance with convertibility is more than likely the best option for most .
Of course , how much life insurance costs for a 20 year old depends on how much life insurance the 20 year old is purchasing , how long they want the premium to be locked in , whether they have any health problems , and if they want to purchase a policy that requires an exam or goes with a quick policy requiring no medical exam . For a very healthy nonsmoker at age 20 , who is purchasing $ 100,000 of 30 year level Term without having to take an exam , the price is about $ 25/month . This is much less if you take an exam .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . If you have any other questions or would like help with your coverage , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button , or call me at 703-665-9133 .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Do You Plan Your Retirement ?
Retirement planning is paying yourself first . Whether you use a qualified plan or non-qualified plan you need to determine your tax bracket . And if you 're investing in the market , you need to determine your risk tolerance . Plans have differing contribution limits , so you need to establish the amount of contributions , when will you retire and your life expectancy .
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
Regardless of whether you are in you 50 's and are asking how do I start planning or if you are asking how do I plan on retiring when I am in my 50 's the process is the same . First determine what a successful retirement would look like for you . Once you have a basic outline then you can determine what needs to be done to fund it . The next step would be to work with a financial planner to calculate what needs to be done and how your resources should be allocated to make it happen . You will find addition information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
If you are asking how do youcalculate how much do you need to save for retirement there is a process to follow . First you need to determine what retirement success looks like to you . Your retirement planner may be trained to help you if not a lifestyle planner could . The next step to figure out what that lifestyle wouldcostand make a retirementbudget . Now you can do somemeaningfulcalculations . Total up what income you expect from any government plans , pensionplans , etc. . Compare this amount to your retirement lifestyle budget . The difference is what needs to be funded byadditionalsavings . There are calculators on the websites of financialinstitutionsto give you an idea . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
In order to determine how much you need to save for retirement , you first need to define what a successful retirement means to you . The next step is to do a budget to determine what is needed to finance your desired lifestyle . This is a better approach than simply randomly choosing a % of your current income . There are calculators available on many websites to help you determine how much you will need to save to generate a specific retirement income . Given the complexity of retirement planning though , you would be best served working with a financial or retirement planner . There are resources and additional information on Retirement Planning on my website , www.jpw.ca . It includes a Retirement Planning Checklist that will save you time and money . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
With financial planing , determining your objectives is the first step . Retirement planning is no different , it is a two part process . First you need to decide what a successful retirement would look like for you and then you need to plan how to fund it . What do you want to do in retirement ? Spend some time discussing this and writing down your objectives . One you have an outline , you can work with a financial planner to design a plan to accomplish your objectives . There is more information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
The best retirement plan for you needs to be tailored to your financial goals . You need to determine whether you are going to fund a qualified or non qualified plan . You need to determine your retirement time horizon . How long and how much will you contribute ? You need to establish your risk tolerance . What returns are you looking for and what is your risk to your contributions ? You need to estimate your life expectancy . How many years will I live during retirement ? These are a few factors that can assist you and your adviser is selecting the right retirement plan for you .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Which States Have The Lowest Auto Insurance ?
On average the lowest premiums are found in New Hampshire , Ohio , North Carolina , Iowa and Maine . The average annual premium is right around $ 1000 . Of course rates are going to vary depending on the characteristics of the individual driver and the vehicle which is being insured . The most expensive state is Louisiana with average rates around $ 2600 .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Shop , shop around . Shop online and over the phone to get the lowest rates possible . Buying auto insurance online is becoming more popular because of the convenience and flexibility it offers . Also calling auto insurance agencies are a great way as well ; some agents will shop multiple companies over the phone and give you the lowest price and you can purchase right on the spot . There are many service providers available online which makes it easy to get your automobile insured without even moving out of your home . The online agency provides all the relevant information necessary for the process and also provides an instant comparison of insurance rates from various service providers at a glance . You can save time and effort that you would have to otherwise spend on doing the research yourself or going out . Online or over the phone is a great way to save and find the cheapest auto insurance quote .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Brandon is right . That is way too broad of a question to answer specifically . But there are studies that are done every year comparing auto insurance premiums from state to state . In the 2014 study , Indiana ranked # 12 in the country for having the lowest auto insurance premium . Compared to most states , Indiana does n't have that many coverage requirements as other states do .
Home insurance can be obtained numerous property and casualty insurance companies . If you currently have auto insurance , you may start with that company as having both auto and homeowners policies with the same company can provide discounts that reduce your overall cost . You can also get quotes online from companies such as State Farm , Farmer 's , Liberty Mutual , and Allstate . While these companies will provide quotes for their own companies , getting a quote from an insurance broker or AAA insurance can provide quotes from several different companies and may provide your best opportunity to find the lowest cost . Be sure to speak to an experienced insurance agent to ensure you have proper coverage . Just because once company has the lowest price does n't make it your best option . Be sure understand deductibles and riders such as earthquake insurance .
Uber drivers must be fully insured when operating a vehicle in all states . When you are working for Uber , their auto insurance policy will provide coverage . However , when their app is not in use , your own personal policy is utilized . Regardless of which state you reside , you must meet all of the minimum liability and financial responsibility requirements . Both fault and no-fault states are included . For example , in Ohio , the Buckeye State 's minimum liability requirement is $ 25,000 per person , $ 50,000 per accident , and an additional $ 25,000 of property damage . Typically , financed and leased vehicles must carry collision and comprehensive benefits . Important : Answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's leading car insurance brokers with more than 35 years of expert and unbiased experience . His top-rated website , Carinsurancezoom.org provides consumers with free online quotes and the lowest auto insurance rates from top-rated companies .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
Renters Insurance premium is different in all areas ; in order to obtain a quote , it is best to input the address and coverage desired and you 'll be able to obtain an instantaneous quotation . In order to obtain the lowest possible premium , you would need to request the lowest Personal Property coverage necessary , the lowest available Personal Liability limit and the highest available deductible ; this is the recipe for the lowest premium . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
The lowest auto insurance rates are easily found when you work with an experienced broker and their website . Why ? It 's important to check multiple companies , and receive unbiased advice from someone with at least 20 years in the business . Whether you have a great driving record or are considered a high-risk , you 'll save money . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier Auto Insurance Broker for last 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
Typically , you can not drive with a suspended license and certainly not without a valid license . If you do , you risk arrest , fine or both . Occasionally , an exception can be made in special circumstances when a `` hardship '' situation exists . It may involve a sick relative or possibly a scenario where you are given limited privileges to drive to work or school . An SR-22 Bond is frequently utilized in circumstances where a license has been suspended , or it is a condition of reinstating the license . Each state is different . And in these situations , you would have to obtain car insurance coverage that equals at least the state minimum liability limit . In many states , the minimum required liability limit is $ 25,000 per person , $ 50,000 per occurrence and an additional $ 25,000 of property damage . However , some state have higher limits while other states have lower limits or are `` no-fault '' states . IMPORTANT : The answer to this question was provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's premier car insurance experts with more than 34 years of experience . Harris manages several top-rated websites , including carinsurancezoom.org , which provides the lowest auto insurance rates to consumers from the largest carriers . Our clients receive unbiased service and advice at any time .
In addition to what was stated above , auto insurance can go up due to legislative reform . In some states there is a catastrophic claims division , which will reimburse insurance companies if they have excessive claims . This fund is collected through your auto-insurance carrier , but goes into a state fund . For example , Michigan has the Michigan Catastrophic Claims Association -LRB- MCCA -RRB- , which costs roughly $ 176/yr . per auto . My best advice is to review your bill with your agent and figure out which costs are incurred because of state regulations and which costs come from your insurance provider . Once you have sorted these out you can then figure out if anything can be done to lower your overall insurance costs .
Great question ! The things to look for are pretty much the same things that you want in your health insurance - the lowest cost , for the most coverage , with the lowest deductible . Everyone understands lowest cost , for the coverage , you want to look for the more things that the policy will pay for , the better . The deductible is the amount that you have to pay out of your pocket before the insurance money kicks in , so the look for the lowest deductible , highest coverage that you can afford . If you need more detail , feel free to contact me , I 'm glad to help . Thanks for asking !
I am assuming your are referring to the `` Comprehensive '' coverage - also called Other Than Collision - found in an auto insurance policy . State Auto is what we call a `` Super '' regional carrier as they are not nationwide , but are in more than a couple regional states . While the basic structure of the auto policy contract is the same company wide , they do tweak their contract based on state laws and state performance ratios . That being said , generally speaking State Auto 's comp coverage would include things like - fire , theft , water damage , glass damage , break-ins and hitting an animal like a deer . Comprehensive claims are subject to the deductible listed on your policy . Give your local State Auto independent agent a call and discuss the specifics of your state and policy language .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
If you go to a website that offers free , instant life insurance quotes from multiple companies , you can enter some factors -LRB- date of birth , gender , term length , face amount , etc -RRB- and see which life insurance companies have the lowest quotes . If there were no questions about build or health , you are most likely viewing quotes for the best rate class , which may not be the class you qualify for . But that exercise does give you an idea of which companies offer the cheapest rates for term insurance for those in perfect health . Keep in mind that being overweight , having a health condition , or being older will probably result in other companies offering the cheapest rates . To find the lowest priced term life insurance rates for you , it is best to call an agent so that they can gather all these variables and do the shopping for you .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
On average , Auto insurance in Ohio is near the lowest in the nation . Ohio averages $ 648 for auto insurance for 6 months , which is nearly $ 200 less than the national average . -LRB- WEBSITELINK -RRB- There are a number of reasons , however , that YOUR rates may be higher . The obvious factors of driving record , type of car , your age and gender , and where you liveplay a role . However , some other factors are credit score , length of time with a previous insurer , and even education/occupation can help determine which risk category you fall into . Another factor to consider is the amount of coverage you are receiving for the premium you are paying . The more coverage you have , the higher your payment will be . However , you should remember that minimum coverage is just that : MINIMUM . It likely would n't be enough to pay if you were sued for causing a serious accident .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is Unscheduled Personal Property Home Insurance ?
A homeowners policy provides a stated amount of coverage for personal property . This is `` unscheduled personal property . '' There is an option to purchase a floater where specific items will be insured to full value , and the deductible is not charged . This is called scheduled property . Not all property can be scheduled . It must be replaceable and the value set by a competent appraiser . This type of coverage is used most frequently for jewelry because the homeowners policy has a limit for coverage for jewelry .
MOST homeowner policies cover televisons under the Personal Effects or Unscheduled Personal Property . They are covered just like any other personal item on an unscheduled basis . YOu might want to check with your agent to assure that you have Replacement Coverage on your contents . This way , the company pays to REPLACE your damaged items based on the REPLACEMENT cost - NOT the ACV -LRB- Actual Cash Value -RRB- - which is REPLACEMENT COST minus DEPRECIATION . Then the loss would be covered subject to your deductible . If someone stole your television worth a $ 1000 and you had a deductible of $ 2000 ... you would n't have any coverage since the loss is LESS than your deductible .
A homeowners policy provides a stated amount of coverage for personal property . This is `` unscheduled personal property . '' There is an option to purchase a floater where specific items will be insured to full value , and the deductible is not charged . This is called scheduled property . Not all property can be scheduled . It must be replaceable and the value set by a competent appraiser . This type of coverage is used most frequently for jewelry because the homeowners policy has a limit for coverage for jewelry .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy because there may be limitations on the coverage that your standard policy may provide . The ring is personal property , but many policies limit the amount of coverage on `` unscheduled '' jewelry that is pieces that are not specifically insured either as a rider or as a stand alone policy . It is best to insure your ring specifically because not only is the coverage broader -LRB- it even covers if the stone falls out and is lost and a standard renters policy wo n't -RRB- but in most cases , the policy deductible will not apply . Get a clear copy of your appraisal and give it to yur licensed agent and they will be able to cover it properly for you .
A basic homeowners policy which I think you are referring to a owner occupied dwelling which is a HO3 . This policy covers the replacement cost of the dwelling . It also covers other structures on the premises . It also covers loss of use . Just in case you were to live in hotel while your home in being repaired after a loss . It also covers medical payment . It also covers liability just in case some one is injured on your premises . It also covers your content . Content may be covered as scheduled or unscheduled
A rider , in this case attached to a Homeowners ' policy , will somehow alter the standard terms and conditions of that policy . One example is a jewelry rider which is used to specifically insure a piece of jewelry to it 's appraised value . Ordinarily unscheduled jewelry can be covered in a standard contract , but the loss causes that are covered can be more limited than those provided in the rider . Another example is a rider to include Earth Movement as a covered peril . This is typically excluded from a Homeowners ' policy but the coverage can be included by use of this rider .
Yes it does , but talk to your Insurance Professional because usually the coverage is somewhat limited . Many policies provide basic coverage for `` unscheduled '' jewelry items . It is is usually limited to a particular dollar amount which can be less than the value of the piece and it is subject to your deductible . You may want to consider providing your Insurance Professional with an appraisal of the ring and asking that it be insured specifically to that appraised value . This can be done either as a rider on your Renters Policy or by a separate policy , whichever you prefer . That is the better way to go because then the piece is more fully protected , even if yo loose it -LRB- which is not covered under a renter 's policy -RRB- and in most cases , there is no deductible .
Yes , they usually do , but talk to your Insurance Professional because many companies will only cover unscheduled camera equipment up to a certain limit and subject to your policy deductible . In order to be sure that you have the proper amount of coverage that you need for items like this , it is best to consider insuring it `` specifically '' on either a rider to your Renters Policy or as a stand-alone contract . This way , your coverage will be based upon the retail value or appraised value of your equipment , which would also be identified by make and model which would make replacement much easier if you suffered a covered loss . Also , in most cases , this coverage is offered with out a deductible as an option meaning that you have in effect dollar 1 protection .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
-- > Normal 0 Of course , the most important issue to consider before selecting any insurance company is be certain they are financially sound and able to back up the promises they make in their insurance policies . Beyond that , for a homeowners policy consider what you are looking for . Why even consider any agent or insurance company if they are unwilling or unable to offer the coverage you want and need ? So , what do you want your home policy to do ? Rebuild your home if it is destroyed ? Pay you to replace your personal property if it is damaged or destroyed ? Defend you and pay a judgment if you are sued for injuring someone or damaging his or her property ? If so , Id suggest looking for an insurer that offers : Guaranteed Replacement Cost Coverage on your home . Many companies dont . Most insurance companies will pay you to rebuild your house but they will stop paying when you limit is reached . Following a major storm , wild fire or other disaster , building materials and available labor become scarce . Prices increase and consumers find they may not have enough insurance . Guaranteed Replacement Cost Coverage automatically increases your limit to whatever you need to rebuild your home , even if it is double or triple the amount of insurance you carry . Replacement Cost and Special Coverage on your personal property . Most homeowners policies limit coverage on your personal property to a number of specific named perils . Look for insurers who offer Special Coverage , often referred to as all - risk , replacement cost coverage not only on your home but your personal property as well . Personal Liability coverage is an important yet often overlooked part of your homeowners policy . Many families include high limit Personal Umbrella coverage as part of their insurance program . Personal Umbrellas are often considered the least expensive way to purchase high personal liability limits . In addition , these policies should have broader insuring agreements with fewer exclusions and limitations than standard home and auto policies . If these features are available , I would then consider the annual premium and possibly the availability of a local agent who is committed to assisting you should you have a problem .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
It is important to talk to your insurance professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy , but generally speaking , theft is a named covered peril in most Home Insurance policies . This would include theft of your personal property from within your home of course , but also includes theft of your property outside of your home . Personal property outside of your home is usually covered up to 10 % of the total personal property amount listed in your policy . If covered , the loss settlement would be subject to your deductible . The claims specialist will also be looking for a copy or a police report .
I am not quite sure what your asking , so I will answer this question , which is what I think you asked : `` What are the standard coverages included in a renters policy ? '' The standard coverage in a renters policy includes personal property , liability and medical payments . Personal property can be general property and scheduled property -LRB- i.e. jewelry , cameras , hearing aids -RRB- on premise ; and , sometimes , there can be a sub-limit for personal property off-premise . Liability covers your negligent acts against a third party . Medical payments provides a small sum of money to people who hurt themselves at your rented premise . I hope this answers what you were asking .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
Homeowners Insurance policies generally provide Personal Property Coverage . There is usually a stipulation on the Personal Property section of coverage stating that 10 % of the limit may be claimed for personal property away from home . Thus , you may have personal property coverage while placed in storage units . It is important to review your homeowners insurance prior to placing personal property in storage units . Also , if you are renting storage units from a well known company , many do have an additional insurance agreement that can be purchased to provide coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does A Spouse Have To Be The Beneficiary Of Life Insurance ?
No - You can name ME as your beneficiary ... . hehehe In order to buy life insurance on someone , you have to have an `` insurable interest '' ... I ca n't buy life insurance on just anyone . There has to be a connection that would harm you financially should the person pass away . Examples are your spouse , kids , other family if you have a financial interest in something together , a business partner , someone you loaned $ $ to , etc. . I bring up insurable interest because in these cases , you , or someone else facing a financial loss due to the persons death , has to be the beneficiary . Now ... if you buy life insurance on yourself , you can pretty much name any person or legal entity as the beneficiary . Leave the funds to a spouse , kids , your favorite non-profit , or to me ... Ok . Not me . So the answer of `` who can be the beneficiary '' all depends on who the insured is , the owner of the policy , and what the connection between everyone involved . have more questions -- Reach out ! - gravy
Though very common to name your spouse as beneficiary to your personal life insurance policy when designed for your family 's financial security , there are other situations that call for life insurance where this might not be the case . For example , if you are a partner in your business with another person , each of you may set up a cross purchase arrangement in the event that either of you die . These can be secured by the purchase of a Life Insurance policy for each of you and in a case like this , you would name your business partner as beneficiary and your partner would name you .
No . A spouse does not have to be the Beneficiary of a Life Insurance Policy . It can be anyone that has what is called an `` Insurable Interest '' in the person being Insured . In otherwords , it is supposed to be someone who could possibly suffer a financial loss if the Insured were to die . This could be most any family member , a close friend , or even a business partner .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
There are a couple life insurance policies that `` cover '' both spouses . One is called a `` First to die '' policy where both spouses are insured until one of them dies . Then the surviving spouse becomes the beneficiary and the policy is terminate . IN a `` Last to die '' policy again both spouses are insured and the policy does not pay a benefit until the last of the two spouses die . Then typically the beneficiary is the estate and the policy is designed to pay the estate tax . Or the beneficiaries could be the children or anyone else . But those are the types of policies that cover both spouses in one policy .
Absolutely . But there are different rules if the joint owners are a married couple or not -LRB- for example , a Father names his daughter as joint owner -RRB- . If the joint owners of the annuity are married , then it is recommended that each spouse names the other as primary beneficiary . For the spousal exception to the required distribution rules to apply , the surviving spouse must be the designated beneficiary of the contract . These rules are designed to prevent the use of joint ownership to obtain tax deferral on annuity earnings over more than one lifetime , except in the case of married couples . In the event of the owners death , the spouse can succeed to ownership by application of the spousal exception to the required distribution rule . If someone other than the surviving spouse is the designated beneficiary , or even if the spouse is the beneficiary along with another person , then even if the surviving spouse is a joint owner , the spousal exception is lost . There are some caveats to setting up a jointly owned annuity . It 's best to talk to a professional insurance agent to avoid the pitfalls .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The Insured person and policy Owner are required to sign the life insurance application , so if one spouse is taking out a policy on the other , both need to sign . If a married person takes out a policy for which he/she is both Owner and Insured , the spouse does not have to sign the application . If the spouse is POA , Guardian , or other legal representative for the Insured person , the spouse may need to sign for the Insured . Another situation in which a spouse might need to sign is if the Owner or Beneficiary of the policy is a trust for which the spouse is a Trustee .
Yes , your estate does include life insurance . While you are alive , it just includes the cash value available in your policy or policies . After death , the life insurance proceeds paid out to beneficiaries are included in the value of the estate . If a spouse is alive , there will not be any estate tax consequences . It is when the surviving spouse dies that the life insurance proceeds on that spouse can a taxable event -LRB- or if the first spouse to die left insurance money to the second to die , and those proceeds had not been spent or distributed when the second spouse died -RRB- .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
Getting married may or may not have an effect on your insurance policy depending upon what actions you take . Technically adding your new spouse to your policy will not change your benefits but it may have an impact on your monthly costs . If you are covered under an individual major medical policy then you would see your monthly premium increased by the amount associated with your spouse 's age for the policy you have in force -LRB- this assumes you are covered under an Affordable Care Act compliant policy taken out on or after January 1 , 2014 when community rating went into effect -RRB- . If you are adding a spouse to an employer based policy then the financial impact will depend upon what your employer 's contribution is towards employees with dependents . Some employers contribute towards the health insurance premium costs of their employees and their covered dependents . Increasingly though , employers are contributing only towards the cost of the employee 's coverage and the employee is totally financially responsible for the difference in cost for adding a dependent to their coverage . To make things even more interesting , the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- does not define spouses as dependents ! So , while the practice has not become wide spread yet , some employers are not allowing spousal coverage under their group plans -LRB- dependent children must be covered according to the ACA -RRB- . What is more common is that if your spouse is employed and their employer offers health insurance and yet you still wanted to add your spouse to your coverage , the employer could assess a penalty charge above and beyond the additional premium cost for adding a spouse in this situation . Obviously the objective here is to discourage the addition of spouses whose cost and risk could be borne by another employer . So , adding a new spouse to your health insurance coverage may not be the simple transaction that it may have been in the past . You need to explore your options and determine what the financial implications are for adding a spouse to your coverage . In some situations you may find that it makes more sense financially to purchase individual health insurance coverage for your spouse than to add them onto your group 's health insurance plan . I would recommend you find a health insurance broker to assist you with this decision making process .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
Life insurance does not go to the debt of the person who died , unless the life insurance proceeds go to his/her estate . If the money goes to the estate , debt collectors will collect from it . Another way life insurance might go to pay off debt incurred by the Insured , is if the beneficiary was a co-signer for the Insured 's debt -LRB- in community property states , a spouse may need to pay off the debt even if their name was not on the contract -RRB- . If not a co-signer -LRB- or not the surviving spouse in a community property state -RRB- , the beneficiary does not need to pay off the debt of the Insured , unless they want to . If it is the beneficiary who has debts and receives a life insurance death benefit , each state has their own limitations on whether or not debt collectors can come after your life insurance proceeds . This website tells about the debt collection laws from some states : WEBSITELINK
If you have had a non-qualified annuity for any length of time you most like have accumulated tax deferred earnings . This means that the growth in the annuity account value has not yet been taxed . When you die and the annuity proceeds are paid , the tax deferred earnings will be taxed as ordinary income to your beneficiary . There is a spousal provision whereby if the beneficiary is your spouse they will have the option to continue to defer the taxes in the annuity . When your spouse dies , any deferred earnings still held by the annuity will now be taxable to your spouses beneficiary .
Life insurance underwriting gives a lot of latitude to the definition of dependent . Its actually pretty interesting . I think this is because the whole principle of insurable interest implies a certain dependency . It is this principle that is the bottom line as to whether or not the company accepts the beneficiary designation on a submitted application . So who really can be dependent on the insured financially , and thereby qualify as a beneficiary on his or her policy ? Certainly a spouse . Does the spouse have to be working ? No . Can the spouse be rich and independently wealthy ? Yes . They still can be considered financially interdependent . Kids ? For sure . Minors ? Of course . How about children that are of legal age ? Well , they certainly could still be financially dependent on their parents . To some extent . -LRB- Until their parents boot them out of the nest :-RRB- Parents ? Yes . That is very common these days . Elder parents become dependent on their grown children financially . Sad to see , but it happens all the time . Other family members ? Could be . How many times do you see a family taking in a niece , nephew , cousin , aunt , or uncle ? Then you have the whole realm of domestic partners . Same sex . Opposite sex . Older man , younger woman . Older woman , younger man . As long as they have some kind of financial independence shared accounts , etc. they could be named as beneficiaries . And we havent even talked about how businesses can be dependent on people , as well as charities . Interesting , dont you think ?
Sometimes when getting divorced one party will `` take over '' the life insurance of the other party . Their assumption is that if they make the premium payments then they will have control over the policy . This is not the case , the other party needs to sign a change of owner form . If this is not done you will be paying the premium on a policy that you have no control over . Your ex-spouse will have the legal right to change the beneficiary if he is the owner , regardless of who is paying the premiums . Also , if your life insurance policies predate your divorce and you are supposed to be the beneficiary of your ex-spouses policy -LRB- or vice versa -RRB- , you should find out if you live in a Divorce Revocation state . If so , it is very important that you update the beneficiary designations using the correct terminology . Failure to do so could be catastrophic . In a Divorce Revocation state you could be listed as the beneficiary of your ex-spouses policy but still not receive the death benefit . One simple change can avert this problem
In Canada if you have a named beneficiary and not your estate then the proceeds bypass probate and are paid directly to the beneficiary . If you name a beneficiary in the `` protected class '' , spouse , parent , child , grandchild , then the policy is potentially protected from the owner 's creditors during the lifetime of the person whose life is insured . In all provinces except Quebec , the relationship must be between the life insured and the beneficiary . In Quebec , it is between the owner and the beneficiary . If you designate a beneficiary as irrevocable , then the policy also has potential creditor protection . In addition no changes to the policy can be made without the irrevocable beneficiary 's consent . If a corporation is owner and paying the premiums on a policy , the the company should be the beneficiary otherwise it will be considered to be a taxable benefit . Ultimately , who should be named the beneficiary depends on what you want to accomplish . If you have any further question or feel I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community ,
The usual beneficiary for life insurance policies depends on the type of policy . If a personal policy and the insured person is married , the usual beneficiary is usually the spouse . If a single person , the beneficiary is often a parent , romantic partner , or sibling . If a business policy , the beneficiary is often the business or business partner . If a policy to cover a loan , the beneficiary is usually a spouse with assignment to the loan company .
The beneficiary of a life insurance policy will receive the death benefit at the death of the life insured . It is common for the spouse to be named as the beneficiary in a life insurance contract as it allows the death benefit to pass directly to the spouse without the need for probate . Its effect generally supersedes anything that a will or trust might say . At the death of the insured , the beneficiary simply produces the death certificate , and the beneficiarys interest in the benefit vests immediately and absolutely . That direct , absolute , and nearly immediate access is a powerful planning advantage . And , in most cases , the amounts paid directly to a beneficiary are not subject to the claims of creditors of the decedent .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Does Health Insurance For A Child Cost ?
Health insurance for a child is typically very affordable . Depending on where you live , the premium can range between $ 25 per month -LRB- short-term coverage -RRB- to about $ 150 per month . In most states , it costs less than $ 100 . Generally , applications are approved quickly and after 2014 , no medical questions will be asked . Comprehensive plans will cover office visits and prescriptions and would tend to be the most popular type of coverage . Preventive benefits are provided at 100 % on most plans . As an experienced broker , I shop for all of the best options from top-rated insurers to make certain you receive the combination of best rate and coverage . Premiums are usually paid monthly and a federal tax subsidy could reduce premiums .
Child Riders : I always offer a child rider to parents . Recently -LRB- today -RRB- I added $ 20,000 child rider a mother 's policy . It cost her a whopping $ 8.60 . Not each , but for all 4 children . So the cost per child is $ 2.15 . And if she has more children or adopts they are covered from the 15th day of life with no qualifying . No extra cost . The automatic coverage has meant the difference of being able to cover a child born with a grave illness or not . Which brings up another benefit of most child riders . Guaranteed convertibility of up 5 or 6 times the amount . In the case above when a child reaches age 25 they have the guaranteed right to convert the $ 20,000.00 rider to $ 100,000.00 Permanent plan . No medical questions , no exams , no blood work . At standard rates . That is a huge benefit . We have converted young cancer patients , a Marine in Iraq and a 25 year old that had been in a coma for years to name a few . All for $ 8.60 or $ 2.15 per child . And they can still buy individual policies on the kids . Or use the saved money to buy much more coverage on mom and dad . Individual child policies : I am also a big proponent of short paying a childs policy . Actually just about anyone under 60 that can afford the extra premium . I do not really show cash values on small policies as they take a very long time to grow and normally do not amount to much . Twenty years ago we were selling $ 5,000 Burial and Child plans . While better than nothing , the now grown children are underwhelmed with the face amount or small cash values . Today I am suggesting much larger plans . Not child plans but plans that will be worth more when they are adults and need to protect their own children . $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 or even $ 250,000 plans are not unusual and very reasonable from top rated Insurance Companies . Starting at about $ 20 . As always an experienced Life Insurance Agent is your best source of information . One that has more than one or two companies or types of insurance .
Here is a good calculator help you figure out how much life insurance you may need with one child . It allows you to enter the age of the child as well as a lot of other factors to give you a more precise life insurance suggestion . WEBSITELINK n general , you need to determine how much it costs to raise your child to adulthood , including inflation , and how much would be lost if the insured 's income was lost . Then try to replace that income with life insurance .
That depends entirely upon how the child support agreement was constructed . If there is not a specific requirement in the child support agreement that the person required to provide child support is required to provide health insurance for the child -LRB- ren -RRB- then there is a very high probability that they would not be required to provide health insurance . So , if the child support judgment requires one partner to just pay `` X '' amount of dollars every month for child support and makes no mention of a requirement to provide health insurance either out of that amount or in addition to it is unlikely that without a new judgment the ex-partner would have to provide health insurance . In my experience , a good divorce attorney specifically addresses this issue in writing in the order of child support as to which parent has the responsibility for providing health insurance for dependent children and even the potential duration of this requirement and the circumstances where it might be voided -LRB- re-marriage for example -RRB- . I am sure the rules on this crucial issue vary from state to state . Any couple with children who are divorcing should have this issue of responsibility for health insurance coverage clearly spelled out in their divorce and child support agreement .
A child rider on Term life insurance adds life insurance to your policy that will cover your child -LRB- ren -RRB- . It is usually available to children age 15 days to approx age 17 -LRB- the age varies by company -RRB- . You select a face amount of the child rider , usually between $ 5,000 and $ 25,000 . This that would pay if a tragedy occurred in your family , and you lost one or more of your children . The child rider benefit would pay that entire amount for each deceased child . The rider pays for death by any reason , just as your policy does , with the exception of suicide in first two years , or if your child had a serious health condition that was not disclosed on the application and death occurred during the first two years of purchasing the rider . If your child has type 1 diabetes , intellectual disability , or other maladies , unfortunately , they will not be able to be on the rider.Therefore , it is good to get the rider while your first child is young ; then the rest are automatically added . While few children pass away , the real value of a child rider can come when your child turns approx 25 -LRB- again , the age varies by company -RRB- . At that time the child rider can usually be changed to a permanent life insurance policy of about 5 times the face amount of the child rider . They do not ask any health questions , so if your child developed an illness after being put on the rider , it will not matter . They will then have a reasonably priced life insurance policy for the rest of their lives .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This calculator can help you determine how much life insurance you need with one child : WEBSITELINK It allows you to put in the age of the child , along with other factors , to give you a suggested amount of life insurance . Or you can estimate what it would cost to raise your child to adulthood , including inflation , and determine how much income would be lost if the insured person were to pass . Then replace that lost income with life insurance .
Before I can answer your question of how much Life Insurance for your child I really need to know what the purpose is . I recently helped a client who wanted to put $ 100 into a life insurance policy per month so it grows cash value plus providing a death benefit . First you need to know some of the `` rules '' we have in the insurance world revolving around children . Insurance companies will need to know how much insurance the parents have first . You see , no one depends on the children so if parents have no insurance , they it will be difficult to convince insurance companies to give a policy on the child . The parents usually need to have about 4x the amount the kids have . Because the cost of insurance is so low on most children , it can be difficult to put a lot of money into a policy without creating a MEC , modified endowment contract . This means that when you take money out of the policy , you will have to deal with taxes . If you are just looking for a burial type policy which you would like to give to your child as a gift when they are older , perhaps when they have a family , you might just start off with a $ 50k or so type of policy . Underwriting is usually minimal in most cases . You can get insurance for your children starting at $ 4 for $ 50k of death benefit , basically the same cost you would pay if you added them to your insurance as a child rider . Contact your broker for more details or contact me .
How much is life insurance for kids ? As few as a couple dollars a month upward . A parent can spend a few dollars a month and have a child rider attached to their policy and provide a small term policy for their child . Or a parent could spend a bit more and purchase a whole life or other cash value policy and create the first building block in a financial plan for their children . A big thing to consider with a child 's policy is buying the future insurability option . What this does very simply , is take away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child later on in life if they wish to purchase additional life insurance . You may need to think about that one but how often can you think of any situation where you can take away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to you ? The future insurability option LOCKS in a `` yes '' several times through your child 's life for a very small amount of premium .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
A child is not an economic unit . Quite the opposite , however , the loss of a child can have a financial impact on the family . This is rarely the motivation for the purchase of life insurance on a child but if you drive the city streets often you will see people asking for donations to help bury a child . It is sad but it does happen . Most people who purchase life insurance on a child are trying to secure coverage for a lifetime at an early age in order to set a very low premium for the coverage and to avoid the possibility that the child might become uninsurable in the future . My brother became uninsurable at about age 22 . This is an issue that concerns many . Life insurance plans are often seen as savings vehicles to accumulate money for future requirements . It is probably not the best way to save money for a college education but it does provide a systematic way to set aside money and for that money to grow free of current taxation . The life insurance policies available to children often have a rider that allows the child to purchase additional life insurance at specific times in the future without proving evidence of insurability . This can be extremely important .
The upper end of cost could be anything depending on amount and health . The lowest I have seen is zero . At least one company will give a small child rider at no cost on a parent or grandparent 's policy . Many child riders fall in the range of $ 20,000 for for about $ 8 . per month . However that covers all minor children . So if you have 4 children your per child cost would be $ 2 . Coverage usually stays in force as long as the base plan does up to the child 's age 25 . And is convertible to five time the original amount . with no evidence of good health . This can be a very important feature . Individual plans run a very wide range based on the type and amount . Recently we wrote a child with a lung disease $ 25,000 of whole life at about $ 20 per month and a 17 year old $ 250,000 term for about $ 14 per month . So the answer is , $ 0 to a lot . Best to talk to an independent agent .
There is three reasons to insure a child with permanent life insurance . First , the reason no one likes to think about , but a child 's death is devastating on all levels , but is a possibility . Not having the money to bury a child just adds extra hardship during an extremely difficult time . Second reason is to protect the child 's insurability . Once the child has a life insurance policy , they can in most cases increase face amounts without proof of underwriting . This is crucial to a child diagnosed with type I diabetes , cancer or even worse . The third and final reason to insure a child with life insurance is the cash value . Not only can you use the policy as a teaching moment for the child to learn to save but the many uses as the child grows into an adult . Cash value from a life insurance policy can be used for emergencies , hardships , as well as college , a down payment on a first house or even retirement . Child life insurance is so affordable and important , every parent should strongly consider it for their children .
To protect yourself and your family against the financial risk of illness or injury and to finance necessary preventive health care needs . If you are a billionaire you can disregard this advice . If you are a regular American then you disregard it at your own peril . Health care is expensive . I had to answer this question recently for some people who had immigrated to the U.S.A. , were rather young to early middle aged and who had n't had occasion to use much health care in our country yet . So here are a few ball park figures I gave them from a report from 2012 . The average cost of an appendectomy is around $ 13,300 . The average cost of a day in the hospital is over $ 3400 . A normal child birth runs around $ 8000 and a C-section birth can be in the $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 range . And this is just normal run of the mill life events most people will experience at some time . My late cousin lost his 7-year battle with prostate cancer and while he participated in a lot of experimental programs as M.D. Anderson that were either free of heavily subsidized we still loosely estimated that his medical costs that he could track over that period were well in excess of $ 2 million . My niece delivered a premature child at 26 weeks and the child spent another 6 + months in neonatal intensive care , they 've crossed the $ 1 million dollar threshold and the meter is still running as their child will probably require some level of treatment for the rest of his life . Oh , and you need to have health insurance to protect yourself against the individual mandate tax penalty included in ObamaCare . Which in 2015 will be $ 325 or 2 % of your income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- and that will steadily increase in following years . Hopefully this will help answer your question as to why someone would need health insurance .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
A person can usually get life insurance on their child 's father . Sometimes a court will even order the father to carry life insurance so that their child is provided for if the father should pass away , and his child support end . Whether or not your child 's father pays child support and/or has visitation rights may enter into the underwriter 's decision as to how much life insurance you can purchase on him . Shopping among a number of companies should find you one that will provide you with the amount you desire .
In what way do you mean ? As a college funding choice , possibly , but it would require significant investment that might be better spent on the parents to insure college . A life insurance policy on a child is a good idea for several reasons . Set up properly it is a financial cornerstone to a sound financial portfolio beginning for a child as they grow into adulthood . Imagine locking in a price that is extremely low and having it gain in value over the years into adulthood . Add the option of guaranteed insurability to the plan and you 've taken away the ability for an insurance company to say `` no '' to your child in the future . That is extremely valuable . Now , let 's look at the sad side of insurance on a child . What if you need it ? As heartbreaking as it would be to lose a child , imagine having to figure out what you can `` afford '' for a service or headstone ? Imagine how much time you 'll need off of work and what your employer would cover salary wise ? For the same reason I purchased insurance as a young single man , long before I went into this business , I did n't want a double or triple whammy for my parents who would already be dealing with my death . Throw lost wages in there and having to find the money to bury me and I 've created devastation in my household . While may God forbid , if you were to lose a child , is n't that enough ?
Several reasons , some pretty straight forward and some you may not have given thought to . First is the misfortune of losing a child . What will you do ? Will you need time ? Will you need money to purchase the things you and your spouse want to for the child ? Can you turn to your spouse and say `` No , we ca n't aford that headstone , let 's get something cheaper . '' ? While it is easy to have an answer when not faced with the situation . It 's another thing to live through losing a child . Now for the positive . Locking permanent life insurance in for a child gives them the best price at the lowest cost when they are in the best health . The opportunity to build cash values over a long period of time is pretty good . The other thing you can do with a child 's policy is buy future insurability options where your child can increase their insurance later in life without medical underwriting at the same class . What these future options do is `` take away '' an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child later in life when maybe their health is not so good . This feature alone is more valuable than most imagine . I have insurance on my kids , never thought of a good honest reason not to provide it for them . It covered them while they grew and gives them a headstart as adults . It 's a positive thing to do .
I agree with Bob and Larry above and to add a little more detail about the age range : A parent can take out a life insurance policy for a child 's benefit , usually when the child is 2 weeks old . The parent does this to provide guaranteed insurability for the child and/or to provide a vehicle to accumulate money for the child . When the child is 18 or older , the parent can change ownership to the child . The maximum age that I have seen to take out a policy is 90 years old .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Work In Other Countries ?
Most countries allow their citizens to purchase individual health insurance and many employers provide health insurance as well . In some European countries health insurance premiums are financed through a VAT -LRB- value added tax -RRB- that is factored in to the price of each product you purchase . VAT 's increase the cost of goods tremendously .
There are different degrees of healh care coverage from complete to none around the world . I am assuming that you mean other industrialized nations that provide government supplied health care . With a single payor funding for health care is done through several methods of taxation . Usually when you review individual tax brackets in these other countries you 'll find they are considerably higher than here in the US . Other countries also use what is known as a value added tax -LRB- VAT -RRB- to certain products or services that generate additional revenues to support health services . While there is a constant debate on which system is better , one must remember all systems cost money and no system is `` free . '' A dollar spent in healthcare is a dollar spent anywhere you are . Some countries ration their healthcare by availability and others by price . Healthcare is going to be a tough problem for every nation as the population world wide ages and continues to grow in number . No system is perfect , all systems are strained right now . .
I disagree with Bob . When people ask if they are covered they usually mean `` will the company pay the bill '' . You always want to read your policy before assuming that you are covered or even taking the word of an Insurance company telemarketer . ASK for the specific policy language . Bob is correct that in the few cases where you are `` covered '' YOU will pay the bill first and then get reimbursed . Medicare is an excellent example of limited coverage outside the US . Bob is also correct in that there are many things that are not covered . Personally , I would not leave the US without evac coverage to get me home .
Taking nothing away from + Larry Gilmore response , I am going to approach the question from a different angle . If the question relates to a Unites States based health insurance plan and you are traveling to another country , the answer is MOST major medical health insurance plans are worldwide . That being said there are some things you need to know . When you leave the US there are no provider networks . Medical providers in foreign countries are usually reimbursed on an `` as billed '' basis . Minor claims incurred outside the US are usually paid by the insured and then you file for reimbursement from your carrier when you return . Major medical plans do not cover med-evac , return of mortal remains , or translation of medical records . It is always a good idea to purchase an international travel medical plan as a supplement when traveling outside the US border .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
Is life insurance international ? There are many possible answers to that question and factors to consider . Purchasing life insurance from another country could have complications and you would be advised to check before you buy . If you are referring to coverage , then yes , life insurance is international . Insurance companies do ask travel and vacation questions when the policy is being underwritten -LRB- before issue -RRB- and will sometimes charge more for travel to certain countries and exclude coverage from death while you are in others . Another factor to consider are the tax laws of your country , the country the policy was issued in and the country the beneficiary is located in . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Generally , Medicare will not pay for health care or supplies you get outside the US . There are a few exceptions ; details can be found at : WEBSITELINK . Normally the term `` Expat '' -LRB- Expatriate -RRB- refers to someone sent abroad from their employer - to a country other than their native country , for work . Typically an Expat employment arrangement would include appropriate comprehensive health insurance coverage within the destination country regardless of the Expats age , and Medicare coverage would not be necessary .
There are different degrees of healh care coverage from complete to none around the world . I am assuming that you mean other industrialized nations that provide government supplied health care . With a single payor funding for health care is done through several methods of taxation . Usually when you review individual tax brackets in these other countries you 'll find they are considerably higher than here in the US . Other countries also use what is known as a value added tax -LRB- VAT -RRB- to certain products or services that generate additional revenues to support health services . While there is a constant debate on which system is better , one must remember all systems cost money and no system is `` free . '' A dollar spent in healthcare is a dollar spent anywhere you are . Some countries ration their healthcare by availability and others by price . Healthcare is going to be a tough problem for every nation as the population world wide ages and continues to grow in number . No system is perfect , all systems are strained right now . .
Is universal health insurance a good idea ? Well yes and no . In some countries it works very well , others not so much . Some of this could be that usually in countries that are universal health countries some access to health care services are limited , some drugs are n't available because of profit margin limits . I think the happiness depends on the culture of the population . The hard thing I see for America adopting Universal Healthcare would be the idea of limited or delayed services as we as a culture , only wait for cell phones and movie premieres . Certainly there is more to it , but that is for another day as the answer is n't easy and would take pages of text to cover .
An automobile policy covers an automobile . The coverage applies in the US , and Canada . Coverage also applies in Mexico within fifty miles of the United States border . It does not cover a vehicle licensed or operating in any other country . The driver is not the consideration . The consideration is the automobile . If you want to drive in another country buy insurance in the other country for that period of time .
I have lived in a number of countries . I think that life insurance companies existed in each country that I visited . Insurers are usually not interested in insuring people who do not reside in their country . The basis for the rate calculation is different because the life expectancy in different countries varies a great deal . There are novel distribution schemes . In England you could buy a life insurance policy from the service station attendant .
In order to answer your question some information is required . Are you a citizen of Abu Dhabi or a American citizen working in Abu Dhabi ? There are a number of insurance companies that issue ex-patriot health insurance policies for individuals who travel in foreign countries or work in foreign countries . It is important to understand how long you will be in Abu Dhabi and your age to give you a better asnwer to your question .
It truly depends on who you ask . Personally I feel it is a great thing that has happened to our country . It has been a rough start but this is history in the making . Look how far Medicare has come since it 's inception . `` Obamacare '' , also know as the Affordable Care Act , is allowing people with pre-existing conditions to now see the doctors they want to see and if they can not afford the insurance then the government is going to pay for some if not all of it . I think this is going to be the Legacy that President Obama is known for and once al the kinks are ironed out and people are educated to exactly what this means for them and stop listening to all the propaganda on TV then they will then come to realize it . If all of these other countries can have socialized medicine and have made it work then why ca n't the most powerful country in the world pull this off . Try it yourself by visiting WEBSITELINK and being educated on the matter and then get a quote and see how much , if any , the government will pay for your subsidy .
Anthem health insurance is part of the Wellpoint group . They are one of the largest health insurers in the country and offer health plans in many parts of the country . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for further assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I think your question may be a bit different than perceived by the earlier respondent . Are you asking if you fly to another location and rent a car is that covered as a temporary vehicle or not and then if it is a temporary vehicle does your own insurance apply or do you need to buy liability coverage at the rental counter . If I understand the question correctly the answer is that it depends . You may have coverage as a temporary substitute vehicle to the extent that you have coverage on the vehicle you are substituting for . I would suggest you discuss this issue with your agent , so he can review what exactly you have coverage for . Keep in mind that auto insurance in the US is typically limited to the US and Canada not Mexico so when you travel to another country be sure to go over your itinerary with your agent . Some countries like Mexico do not recognize US insurance as being valid . If you get to the rental counter in another country and forgot to review things with your agent then do this . Buy at least the minimum liability coverage they have required of the locals .
Prudential Life Insurance Company is a company domiciled in the states however the Philippine Prudential , best guess as I see from other companies , set this company up to be able to provide insurance and investments in the Philippine 's . Many large Insurance company 's will create other companies so they can work in other parts of the world , following the regulations which otherwise would not work in the states or other countries .
I insured a car in a European country that didnt have a speed limit on its main thoroughfares . That policy cost me a multiple of my USA based car insurance because the frequency and severity of accidents was greater . I have insured a car in an Asian country where liability claims were settled for a very small amount and the car could be fixed on most street corners . That insurance was inexpensive . My suspicion is that auto insurance is less in most countries , but higher in a few .
That is a great question ! In most areas of the country , a fire that destroys or damages your home would be covered under your homeowners policy . Fire was the original reason that homeowners policies really became popular . In those areas of the country where wildfires are more of a hazard , it may not be . Many companies in those areas will only add wildfire coverage as a rider , or a separate policy , in much the same way that flood damage is n't included in many coastal areas . The coverage has to be purchased as a flood insurance policy . Check with your agent to find out if your policy does , or does n't cover you . Thanks for asking !
Most countries allow their citizens to purchase individual health insurance and many employers provide health insurance as well . In some European countries health insurance premiums are financed through a VAT -LRB- value added tax -RRB- that is factored in to the price of each product you purchase . VAT 's increase the cost of goods tremendously .
There are essentially 3 ways a person gets health insurance coverage of some type in our country ; 1 -RRB- Health insurance through an employer based group plan where you or a spouse work 2 -RRB- Individual major medical insurance , purchased either inside or outside of the government marketplaces 3 -RRB- Government Entitlement Programs such as Medicaid , Medicare and other state and/or Federal programs An experienced and knowledgeable insurance broker representing multiple insurance carriers can guide you through the system for the first 2 options . And , yes , you can go online and shop and buy health insurance and you might be great at that . However , most people are n't comfortable with the complexities of shopping their own health insurance and health care reform has made telling the differences between health insurance plans more difficult than ever . So , get some free personal help from a person who understands your needs and your market area .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can You Buy Medicare Part A ?
For most individuals , Medicare Part A will be premium-free . This happens if you 're turning 65 and you 've hit your 40 credits -LRB- earned through working life/paying FICA taxes -RRB- . If you do n't hit this , the premium will be up to $ 426 per month . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A under other means -LRB- e.g. you 're under 65 and receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months or you have end-stage renal disease -RRB- . Medicare Part A , in short , is your hospital insurance - Part B is your physician insurance . Part A provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . You 're generally responsible for about 20 % of the healthcare expenses that are incurred during these visits - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . You may want to consider buying a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the other 20 % .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
You are eligible for Medigap coverage if you have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B active . When you first enroll in Part B , you trigger a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as Medicare Supplement plans -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is the BEST time to buy a supplement plan because regardless of your medical history , you can buy any Medigap plan from any carrier and can not be declined . Plans F and G offer the most comprehensive coverage and therefore the most predictable expense structure - a major benefit for individuals on a fixed income . Please note , Medigap plans are standardized so the difference between carriers is price - plan F is the exact same plan F from every insurance company . Beyond this window , you 'll be subject to answering health questions to qualify for a new plan -LRB- every carriers ' questions are different -RRB- if you do n't have a guaranteed-issue right available to you . If you 're under 65 , you can still purchase a Medigap plan if you 're on Medicare for disability or ESRD , but the cost will be very high . Medigap plans are designed to be purchased by individuals age 65 and up . Under age 65 individuals on Medicare will likely either buy a Medicare Advantage plan or stay under original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and add a stand-alone Part D plan for their prescription drug coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap and Part C are not the same . Medigap is supplemental coverage to your Original Medicare Part A and B . You do n't have to buy a Medigap Plan , it is optional . Many people , however , use the Medigap Policy to help cover the 20 % of Medicare approved costs not covered by Part A and B. Medicare Supplement insurance is private insurance in which you pay a premium every month . You are allowed to visit any provider who accepts Medicare . Part C is called a Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO , so you are restricted to using network doctors . This type of Plan combines Part A , Part B , and usually Part D -LRB- drug coverage -RRB- . It 's important to note , if you join a Medicare Advantage Plan , you do n't need and ca n't be sold a Medigap Policy . In other words , you ca n't buy a Medigap Policy to supplement your Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
You do n't `` need '' Medicare Part C , but you may choose to have it as your Medicare coverage . Medicare Part C is really known as the Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO . Part C combines your Original Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- medical -RRB- , and usually Part D -LRB- drugs -RRB- . It 's important to note that if you have Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- , you do n't need a Medigap Policy and ca n't be sold one to help supplement your health care . You can only purchase a Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- , if you are still on Original Medicare Part A and Part B . There are a lot of moving parts to Medicare . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let me start by saying that Medigap isnt the same as Part B but lets get a better understanding of how Medicare works . If you look at page 17 of the 2015 Medicare and You book you will see there are 2 main choices on how you can get your Medicare coverage . There is Original Medicare that includes Part A and B with the option to fill in the gaps in Original Medicare by buying a Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Or there is Medicare Advantage Plan , Part C , which include Part A , Part B and in most cases Part D. On page 92 of the Medicare and You book you will find that all Medigap policies are standardized . All polices offer that same basic benefits but different insurance companies may charge you different premiums for the same exact policy . Its a good idea to use a good broker that represents multi companies that can show you not only the price difference but also the average rate increases because all Medigap policies go up every year . Now there are different Medigap plans A-N , the easiest way to think about this is like car insurance . You can buy a car insurance policy with no deductible but by doing so your premium will be higher . If you choose to assume some of the risk , buying a policy with a deductible your premium will be lower . As long as youre in fairly good health -LRB- no major illnesses or recent hospitalization with in the last 2 years -RRB- you can show the market for the lowest price , remember Medigap plans always have a price increase each year and its always a wise decision to shop around every couple of years to find the best price . I am aware of one insurance company that once you are approved , will allow you to change between plans without re-looking at your current health , which may be a viable option if you want to save money with a higher deductible while you are in good health and then when your health starts to change you change your plan to a lower deductible . If you have any other question feel free to contact me for a phone review or we can chat on Skype .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal government-run health insurance program for individuals age 65 and older -LRB- and those on disability or have end-stage renal disease who are under age 65 -RRB- . It 's made up of 4 parts : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A - this is your hospital insurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B - this is your physician insurance 3 -RRB- Medicare Part C - also known as Medicare Advantage . This coverage is sold by private insurance companies and provides benefits equal to or greater than those provided by Medicare Part A and Part B . Some carriers offer prescription drug coverage with a Medicare Advantage plan 4 -RRB- Medicare Part D - this is your stand-alone prescription drug plan . This is also sold by private insurance companies and can be used with Medicare Parts A & B . Many individuals add a Medicare supplement plan to their Part A & B coverage to cover expenses Medicare does n't cover .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Term Life Insurance Have A Surrender Value ?
That is a great question ! Term life insurance policies are cheap because they have no extra 's and a definite point on the calendar where they end . Whole life policies have more moving parts , and an indefinite end point , so are more expensive . One of those moving parts is the cash value aspect . Since term policies do not have this aspect , they have no surrenderable value . The premium that you pay for your term policy pays only for the cost of your insurance . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Term Life Insurance does not have a surrender value because this type of policy only provides death benefit coverage . There is no inside cash accumulation in a Term Life policy which is something that you would find in a form of Permanent Life Insurance . If the term policy that you have no longer meets your needs , talk to your Insurance Professional about other options that may be available .
Term Life Insurance does not have a surrender value unless it is ROP -LRB- Return of Premium -RRB- Term . ROP Term will pay back some of the premiums that you paid in if you surrender the policy after at least half the term has passed . If you keep the policy for the entire term , it will usually pay back all the premiums you paid in .
No - with term life insurance , these policies do not build cash value so there is no surrender value if you terminated the coverage . If you wanted to terminate your policy , you could either call the carrier to request it be ended or stop paying the premiums and the policy will lapse on its own . Please note , before terminating your policy , I would highly recommend consulting with your agent to discuss and see if there are any reasons why you should keep it . For example , if the premiums are no longer affordable , you may be able to reduce the face amount of the coverage to lower your premium and keep some level in place . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When talking about cash value in life insurance policies it is important to differentiate between the policy value and the surrender value . For example , in a universal life insurance policy the policy value -LRB- or fund value -RRB- would be the accumulated cash value which is earning interest . However , almost all universal life insurance policies have a decreasing surrender charge schedule . This means that if you were to surrender the policy in the early years the surrender charge could reduce most -LRB- or all -RRB- of the value you receive . The value you would receive is called the net surrender value , because it is net of all charges . At some point , say 10 or 20 years down the road , the surrender charges will go away and the policy value will equal the net surrender value . This is part of the reason why cash value life insurance should always be looked at as a long term proposition .
Cash surrender value in lie insurance is the amount of money you would walk away with if you decided to end a permanent policy before you passed away , or before the policy matured . Term life insurance does not have any cash value , so has no cash surrender value . In Whole Life or Universal Life , there is a surrender charge deducted from the cash value the first years , so there may be little or no cash surrender value until you have had the Whole Life or Universal Life policy for a few years . The amount of surrender value will depend on how you funded the policy , whether you had any loans out against it , policy performance , and length of time the policy was in effect .
That is a great question ! The surrender value is the money that the insurance company returns to you if you were to cancel or `` surrender '' the policy before it reaches it 's expected end . Term life policies will have no surrender value , as they have no value unless they pay out . Whole life policies build a cash value , and it is from this that your returns come . The surrender value is nearly always less than the cash value , as the company will collect fees and charges from that value before releasing it to you . Your policy paperwork will usually list the surrender value . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
Term life insurance is not designed to have a cash surrender value , however you may find a cash surrender value quoted on some term life insurance policies . This cash value is generally a return of unearned premium . Premiums on a life insurance contract can only be booked as as earned by the insurance company on a monthly basis , so if you pay your premiums for a period less frequently than this -LRB- e.g. annually -RRB- the insurer will refund the unearned premium if you surrender the policy . Outside of this , no term life insurance will not have a cash surrender value .
When you say NWML , I assume you are referring to Northwestern Mutual Life . Since I 'm not a NWML agent , it 's hard to comment on the specifics of the carrier 's product , but can hopefully provide some general insight for this type of program . These types of policies typically feature a combination structure of part whole life and part term insurance . Whole life insurance can not be converted to an annuity , nor can term life insurance . If the policy was surrendered for the cash value of the whole life side of the policy -LRB- term life insurance does not build cash value -RRB- , the monies could be used towards an annuity . Please note , if there is a loan -LRB- and any interest on the loan -RRB- on the policy , any remaining surrender charges , the dollar amount you receive can be lower than the policy 's cash value -LRB- think : cash value - loans - interest on loans - surrender charges = amount you actually receive -RRB- . Also , you may want to verify whether there would be a taxable gain on the policy before surrendering it -LRB- the cash value in the policy exceeds the premiums paid into it -RRB- . Also , the only way a whole life insurance policy pays a dividend to the policyowner is if the policy is a participating whole life policy -LRB- non-participating policies do not offer any dividend structure - only the build-up of cash value -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The surrender value of life insurance is the amount that the policy owner would receive if they terminated their cash value policy . There is only a surrender to permanent policies -LRB- Whole or Universal Life -RRB- ; there is no surrender value to Term Insurance policies . The surrender value is the cash value minus any surrender charges or fees that are charged .
No , Term life insurance does not usually have a cash surrender value . Term insurance buys pure protection rather than building up a cash value , and that is why the costs of Term life insurance is usually lower than policies that have cash value . Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- Term is one type of Term that could have a cash surrender value if you kept the policy long enough .
In Canada , most term life insurance policies do not have a cash surrender value . Some policies notably policies with such as 20 or 30 year term may have a cash surrender value or reduced paid up value . Typically 5 and 10 year renewable term policies usually do not have any cash surrender or paid up value . The mechanics of this are that in order to keep the premium level you are paying more than the actual `` risk '' in the early years and the additional premium is used to keep the `` risk '' to the insurance company level . If the longer term policies offer anything they are more likely to offer a paid up value than a cash value . Check your policy or check with your insurance broker to be certain . If you have further questions , please do not hesitate to contact me or visit my website JPW.ca for information .
The net cash value on a life insurance policy is the net cash value you would receive if you surrendered your policy . -LRB- Not including tax if applicable -RRB- With whole life policies this is the sum of the guaranteed cash value plus any dividends less any indebtedness . With Universal life policies , there is often a surrender charge for the first number of years . So the net cash surrender value would be calculated as cash value less loans and surrender charge -LRB- if applicable -RRB- . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Answers above are correct , but thought you might like to know that 1 . The column that is usually titled `` Account Value '' is the cash value that is usually used by the carrier to determine the amount of loanable money the policyowner may borrow . 2 . When the cash value in the `` surrender value '' column equals the `` Account Value '' , it indicates that the surrender period or charges are no longer part of the cash value equation . However , if a loan is still outstanding , the surrender charge period could be over , but the loan would be reflected in a surrender charge lower than the account value .
When you surrender your life insurance policy , your coverage ends and you stop paying premiums . The insurance company will pay the cash surrender value of the policy which will take a week or two . The cash surrender value is less than the total cash value in the early years of a policy due to a surrender charge which is usually a charge that decline to zero over a period of 5-20 years , depending on the policy . Any policy loans outstanding also reduce the cash value . If you have any gain in the policy - cash surrender value less premiums - then it will be taxable as income .
Do term life insurance policies have a cash surrender value ? Usually they do not . Cash value is essentially needed in a policy to keep the premium level . You pay more in early years and some of the premium is left after covering the risk for the year and it grows the amount at risk to the insurance company decreases . Might be easier to understand the concept using a $ 100.000 non-participating level premium whole life . The cost of insurance at age 40 is much less than at age 85 . You pay a level premium and there is a build up of guaranteed cash that grows at a guaranteed interest rate inside the policy . If you were to die at age 85 , you beneficiary receives the $ 100,000 face amount of the policy . The cash value build up is not paid separately , but is part of the death benefit . Most term policies are as the name suggest are for a specified term . The cash value is theoretically there to keep the premium level , but there is no cash surrender value . Some policies with a longer term for example 30 year term policies do have cash surrender values . These are just general guidelines and you would need to check the policy wordings to be sure . Working with an independent insurance broker , you should be able to find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life Insurance Cash Surrender Value is what will be returned to you if you cancel a permanent life insurance policy that has a cash value available . This surrender value may be less than the actual cash value as all loans will be paid back & surrender fees will be taken . Beware , if the surrender value is more than the money or premium you have paid in , there may be a taxable event you will have to deal with .
To the best of my knowledge , SBLI or Savings Bank Life Insurance Co. only markets term life insurance . I may be wrong , but if you purchased a life insurance policy through SBLI , it is likely term life insurance and there is no surrender procedure . Term life insurance is merely cancelled or allowed to lapse . There is no cash value in term life insurance and there for nothing to surrender . Only cash value plans such as whole life insurance or universal life insurance need to be surrendered . Just call and cancel it . SBLI phone number is 888-438-7254 .
When you cancel a life insurance policy , you no longer have life insurance . If you have a permanent policy and cancel the policy during the first years of the policy , a surrender charge will be deducted from the cash value you receive , and you most likely will not receive any cash value at all . However , you will not owe money to pay the surrender charge . Term life insurance does not have any surrender charges because there is no cash value .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is National Income Life Insurance ?
National Income Life has over three billion of life insurance in force . The company is registered in New York and rated A + -LRB- Superior -RRB- with A. M. Best for overall financial strength . National Income Life Insurance Company is owned by American Income Life , created about fifty years ago by Bernard Rapoport .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Liberty National Life Insurance agency is one of over 1000 insurance companies in the United States . It is owned by Torchmark Corp. , which is a financial services holding company . Liberty National is a Fortune 1000 company , so not one of the biggest . They sell Term and Whole life policies as well as supplemental health insurance policies . Liberty National is a Stock company , which means that it answers to the stock holders first and does not offer dividend participating Whole Life as do the Mutual companies like Mass Mutual , Guardian , and a handful of others . They are based in Texas and do not have a bunch of nice impressive offices around the country . They specialize in `` home sales '' - that is their agents come to you at your home to meet with you and sell their products rather than bring prospects and clients to their office boardrooms , which they do not have . -LRB- Which is why I suspect you 've asked your question ... Someone came knocking on your door ? -RRB- If you are considering purchasing a life insurance policy from Liberty National , I suggest you first read the answers to the question posted on this site , `` What are the Characteristics of Whole Life Insurance '' , and ask if Liberty National policies offer all the same options .
There is no uniform health insurance system in Europe , each nation has it 's own system . On the whole , European nations have taken a more socialized approach to financing health care than we have in the United States -LRB- though ObamaCare is kind of changing that -RRB- . In Switzerland you are mandated to purchase private health insurance . In Britain they have the National Health Service that provides health insurance for the masses while at the same time having a growing private health insurance and health care delivery system for the people who can afford to operate outside of the national system -LRB- the class system remains alive and well in England and many European nations -RRB- . Some European systems give the illusion of being `` free '' but people are really paying for their care in the form of higher taxes and rationing of care along with price controls on healthcare providers . While there are things we Americans can learn from the European experience , the Europeans have hardly achieved perfection when it comes to health care and health insurance .
National Income Life has over three billion of life insurance in force . The company is registered in New York and rated A + -LRB- Superior -RRB- with A. M. Best for overall financial strength . National Income Life Insurance Company is owned by American Income Life , created about fifty years ago by Bernard Rapoport .
In 2014 the national average cost of a Silver level plan -LRB- approximately 70 % coverage level and the most common plan design purchased -RRB- was $ 328 per month . This cost , in the overwhelming number of cases , will increase for 2015 plan year rates . As this is a national average figure and health insurance costs vary significantly from state to state , between regions within a state , and between different insurance carriers , it is only the roughest approximation of what health insurance might cost you . Your age and tobacco use status , plus the health insurance plan and insurance carrier you select are the primary factors in determining what your specific individual health insurance rates will be . Finally , whether or not you fall within the income ranges where you would qualify for some degree of an advanced premium tax subsidy will also factor into what your final monthly cost for individual health insurance would be .
Depending upon your point of view , one could say that virtually all major health insurance carriers are equally good or bad in today 's marketplace . The health insurance industry has been highly regulated at the state level for decades and with the Affordable Care Act we have an entirely new set of Federal regulations for health insurer 's to comply with . So , yes , CIGNA offers excellent services . So , do AETNA , Assurant , Humana , United Healthcare and scores of other options around the nation . Defining how `` good '' CIGNA is versus any of its national competitors is a subjective exercise that means different things to different people . In the new health insurance marketplace of 2014 the informed buyer will have to understand that the insurance carriers have to devise different ways of covering up to $ 6250 in potential financial exposure per person in different plan design configurations and price points . The insurance carriers has to come up with their own ideas as to how to have plan designs that fit into the new `` Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum '' allowed by the law . Right now that can translate into some very meaningful benefit plan design differences between insurance carriers and within the same `` metallic ' tier level . You may have one insurance carrier offering only high deductible plans while a competitor may offer some plans with different office visit and/or prescription copayments and yet they both fall within the range of being qualified `` Bronze or Silver '' plan designs . Upon examination they will find that the various carrier 's first attempts at plan designs have yielded results that are often confusing , inconsistent and can be make it even more difficult for the non-insurance person to see the value differences between various carrier 's plans . This is where you start to come to those intersections of Price , Benefits and Network that help drive a person 's buying decision . At certain price points and for certain of their plan design 's overall benefits , CIGNA can offer some of the best coverage for the dollar in today 's marketplace . The are a nationally recognized brand with an large , national provider network and a growing offering of value added programs designed to keep their members healthy or effectively manage the chronically ill . While no one can say that any insurance carrier is the `` best '' in each and every way and every location . CIGNA strives for a consistency across the large number of various insured populations they serve . I can feel comfortable in saying that CIGNA should be part of your consideration in the individual and large group market segments .
There 's hundreds and hundred 's of life insurance companies in the marketplace and there are many carriers that have a superior financial rating -LRB- `` A '' , `` A + '' , or `` A + + '' rating -RRB- . Some of the big name companies with superior ratings that feature competitive rates in the term life insurance marketplace are Banner Life , MetLife , American General , Lincoln National , Genworth , Ohio National , Principal National , just to name a few . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Apparently president Teddy Roosevelt championed the idea of a national health insurance program way back in 1912 , but was unsuccessful in getting it established . Later in 1945 President Truman proposed to congress that a national health insurance fund be created to benefit all Americans . That also failed to gain traction . President Kennedy made a bid for a national health insurance program also pleading that 56 % of Americans over 65 had no health insurance nor could afford it . Finally in 1965 President Johnson signed the legislation that made Medicare a reality .
National health insurance policies already exist . Employer group health insurance plans , Medicare and VA coverage are national plans . If you are asking should individuals be able to purchase their own plan from a national risk pool , my answer would be no . Such plans would be too expensive for individuals in low cost areas which would cause adverse selection . Eventually such a plan would self destruct .
Single Payer National Health is when there is a nationwide health coverage insurance that is managed and paid for by a single institution . Medicare is such a policy . It has a uniform coverage for all participants across the nation and is paid for by the federal government . There are good and bad elements to this type of coverage . Good : A guaranteed baseline of health coverage for all citizens in the country regardless of financial means and employment status . There would be no such thing as loosing your job and then loosing your coverage . Since nearly all people living in the country would be on the insurance nearly all doctors and hospitals would have to take it because there would be few patients willing to pay out of pocket for treatment . No bankruptcies because you got sick . There are around 2 million bankruptcies in 2013 because of healthcare bills . This would n't happen because the risk and cost of healthcare is shared among the entire tax paying population . Bad : Single payer systems provide a lack of choice . There would be no competition for the best coverage or the best network of providers so it can potentially reduce opportunities for innovation and providers pushing for that competitive edge . If someone wants anything more than baseline coverage , you would still have to `` buy up '' . Much like seniors do with Medicare Advantage plans , so the national coverage would not solve all the problems . Funding is limited by federal budgets and tax income . This means that providers would be reimbursed based on what the government can afford . This can lead to shortages , particularly in expensive treatments because the profit motive is not as well fueled . Complexity is an issue . We all know haw bloated and complex government agencies are , just think if they try and care for 350 million patients and all of their health issues !
Liberty National is a wholly owned subsidiary of Touchmark Corporation . They offer Life Insurance policies as well as Accidental Death Insurance , and Supplement Health Insurance products for cancer , critical illness , hospital intensive care , hospital income , hospital accident , and Medicare supplement plans . Liberty National life insurance is headquartered in McKinney , TX .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
There is no one national `` best of breed '' when it comes to heath insurance . Health insurance is driven at the state level and therefore varies greatly from one state to the next . Even products and rates from the same national insurance carrier will vary from state to state . People 's definition of `` best '' vary from person to person as well . For some it 's the plan with the lowest monthly premium cost for others it is the plan with the richest level of benefits . In that sense , only you can determine what private health insurance plan in your state are the best fit for you . I would recommend you seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is certified to sell health insurance both on and off of the government health insurance marketplace to help you determine what the answer to your question is for you specifically .
`` National Benefit Life Insurance Company '' used to be `` Beneficial National Life Insurance Company '' . They underwrite State Disability Insurance , Student Life Insurance , and term life insurance sold by Primerica Agents in New York State . Their home office is in Long Island City , NY and they are rated A + by AM Best .
Here are a few of the 30 year guaranteed term life insurance companies : American General , American National , Ameritas , Aviva , Banner , Lincoln Benefit , Lincoln National , MetLife Investors , Nationwide , Principal , Protective , Pruco , Savings Bank , Security MTlNY , Transmerica , United Omaha . There are other companies who have guaranteed universal life that can be configured to perform like a 30 year term life insurance . Keep in mind that there are age limitations to 30 year guaranteed term life insurance .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
Jackson National acquired Reassure America Life Life Insurance Company in 2012 . In 2007 , Valley Forge and Reassure America merged under the Reassure America Name . Southwestern Life Insurance Company merged into Valley Forge on 12/28/2006 . If you follow this lineage backwards , you can see that calling Jackson National at 1 -LRB-877-RRB- 565-2968 should at least give you a starting point .
Of course , the best policy is the one you can afford . But , in my opinion , the best product is an Indexed Universal Life Policy , through National Life Group , and brokered through Premier Financial Alliance . Why ? Because that policy offers Living Benefits , including chronic illness , chronic care , and more , all at a cost the same or less than most companies offer their simple life insurance policy with payment by those folks only at death , while National Life will pay you while you are alive ! Talk with an agent enrolled to sell these exclusive products . GARY LANE . Thank you .
Liberty National Life Insurance Company started doing business in 1900 . It is based out of McKinney , TX . Liberty National is a wholly owned subsidiary of Torchmark Corporation and is rated A + by AM Best as of June , 2013 . It also has high ratings from Fitch , Moody 's and Standard & Poor 's . Liberty sells life insurance and Supplemental Health and Accident Insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Cash Value Mean On A Life Insurance Policy ?
The cash value of a life insurance policy is a pool of money that you can borrow from to use for your own purposes , while you are still alive . If you pay back your policy loan with interest , you will still be able to keep the death benefit intact , as well . If you were to surrender -LRB- drop -RRB- your policy , you would receive the cash value minus any fees .
Cash Value Life Insurance is a permanent policy that can accumulate cash by differing credit methods . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life use credited interest rates . Indexed universal life uses domestic and foreign indices and variable universal life uses separate sub accounts with access to equities and bond vehicles .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
The concept of borrowing from a life insurance policy , whether it is a whole life or universal life insurance policy , is taxes . The idea of cash value life insurance is the ability to accumulate cash that is tax deferred . You may later in life or in your retirement be able to borrow down your cash value . This does two good things for you . It keeps your death benefit in tact , but can lower it as cash value is depleted and because you are borrowing your own money and the insurance company is charging you very low interest rate , Uncle Sam considers the money a loan and not income . This means your money is income tax free . Always seek the advice of your agent or company . There are a few caveats that you should be aware of while you are borrowing against your cash value life insurance policy , but it can be a very effective tool for you to use in retirement . You also have the choice to repay the cash value or not . Beware of cashing out your cash value life insurance policy because those proceeds are taxable .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
The cash value is the portion of whole life insurance that has built up so far in your cash account . Think of it like money in the bank . The way whole-life is designed , it has a level premium for the length of the policy or until it is paid off . What 's really happening is as the cash account grows , the actual insured amount reduces by the same amount . You become more and more self-insured each year . If you buy $ 100,000 whole-life policy , in the begining your insured amount is $ 100,000 and your cash value is zero . Many years later your cash value is $ 40,000 and the insured amount is $ 60,000 for a total death benefit of $ 100,000 . Several more years later your cash value is $ 90,000 and the Insured amount is $ 10,000 for a death benefit of $ 100,000 If you live to age that the policy endows -LRB- usually age 95 or 100 on older policies and age 121 on newer ones -RRB- the cash value is $ 100,000 and the insured amount is zero . You are now self insured . You can use the cash value while you are living by taking policy loans which are actually loans against the cash build up in your policy not actually withdrawals from the policy or you can cash surrender the policy and walk away with the cash . If you have a participating policy that pays dividends , you can have additional cash value and death benefit build up from that .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
I am a life insurance salesman who believes that cash value life insurance should be a last resort . This product is first and foremost a way of taking care of your loved ones , your obligations , your business , and your favorite charities . Financial security means a lot here , and life insurance is a very cost-effective way to provide that . This means that someone should never buy a cash value life insurance if it means short-changing the beneficiary on survivor benefit . Having said that , cash value life insurance can be a superb way to insert guaranteed cash into your financial portfolio . I frankly have not come across another product that can match it in terms of guarantees . On top of that , favorable tax treatment make that cash build up very attractive . There are a few other vehicles that make cash and again this is the non - guaranteed portion of the policy available so quickly , and with such lenient tax treatment .
When talking about cash value in life insurance policies it is important to differentiate between the policy value and the surrender value . For example , in a universal life insurance policy the policy value -LRB- or fund value -RRB- would be the accumulated cash value which is earning interest . However , almost all universal life insurance policies have a decreasing surrender charge schedule . This means that if you were to surrender the policy in the early years the surrender charge could reduce most -LRB- or all -RRB- of the value you receive . The value you would receive is called the net surrender value , because it is net of all charges . At some point , say 10 or 20 years down the road , the surrender charges will go away and the policy value will equal the net surrender value . This is part of the reason why cash value life insurance should always be looked at as a long term proposition .
Universal life insurance can be variable or fixed . They are simply two different types of Universal Life . Here are the basic definitions : Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- is a form of life insurance that can build cash value . The cash value can be invested in separate accounts -LRB- similar to mutual funds -RRB- and the owner of the policy gets to choose which separate accounts are chosen , within the scope of what that particular product offerings are . The word `` variable '' refers to the fact the owner can invest in accounts that vary in value such as stocks and bonds . This variable component results in the cash value in your VUL increasing above or decreasing below what you put in . Universal Life -LRB- UL -RRB- is a form of permanent life insurance where the excess in premium payments are credited to the cash value of the policy . If the cash value is referenced against a stock index such as the S&P 500 , it is called an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . An IUL does not put your money in the market but rather references the performance of that market over a measured period of time -LRB- such as a year -RRB- and credits you with interest if the referenced index has increased . Typically , the cash value of an IUL will not decrease as the result of that market declining - they would simply not credit your cash value account with interest for that particular year .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
A life insurance policy that has cash value has several non forfeiture options . Should you no longer be able to make the premium payments you may choose to do one of three things . You can use the cash value to purchase a paid up policy . This means you have a reduced face amount for whatever the cash value will buy . You must notify the company if you want this option . If you do nothing and simply stop paying , the policy will go on what is called extended term . The cash value will purchase low cost one year term for the full face amount until the cash value is used up . There are tables in your policy that show this . You could also cash surrender the policy for the cash value .
Your Life Insurance policy will have the specifics of the `` Grace Period '' that provides and cushion for you when you miss a payment . Life Insurance companies usually want youto keep you policy . Their Grace Period is usually 30 to 60 days depending on the policy and the company . The type of policy will make a difference as well . A Term Life Insurance policy does not have any `` Cash Value '' or a side account that can grow at an interest rate like a savings account and cover the missed premium . This `` Cash Value '' is a feature of a Universal Life policy . The Term Life policy would be in danger of lapsing much quicker and you are probably going to cancelled quicker . A Universal Life policy with cash value is going to use the saving portion to pay the premium . The Universal Life will lapse once the cash value is depleted and the grace period expires . You can call your agent or Life Insurance company and work out options on the Universal Life policy such as lower the `` Face Amount '' or amount of death benefit to help you make the policy last longer . `` Whole Life Insurance '' will have a grace period as well . Coverage options beyond the grace period become more complicated . This Whole Life policy also has a `` Cash Value '' or savings portion as well . You will be subject to the policy 's `` Non Forfeiture Options '' within the policy . These options are different for each policy . You will have to check your policy . Usually , there are 3 options : Return of the cash value to you minus any loans you took out , you can change to a lower amount of insurance that is `` Paid Up '' or you do not have to pay premiums for the amount of death benefit , or you can change to a `` Term Life Insurance '' policy for a specific period of time then the insurance stops .
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
There are several reasons . With cash value life insurance such as whole life , you do not have to worry about prmiums going up as you get older and most likely to need the insurance . The cash value can help provide a buffer if your financial situation changes . Every whole life policy as nonforfiture options in the contract . The cash value can help conserve a poliy utilizing thes options . If you can not afford the premiums any longer the cash value can be used to buy a reduced paid up policy according to a schedule in your policy . You can also stop making payments and the policy will continue in-force with the cash value buying extended term insurance until the cash value is used up . You can cash surrender the policy and get some equity . When you deduct the cash value of a policy from the total premiums you pay you will see that in the long run cash value insurance was far less expensive than buing term . You can also take a loan on your cash value that is very interest friendly and will have no repayment schedule , although it is always best to at least pay the interest since the amount of the loan would be deducted from the face amount when you die .
Whole Life has set premiums that never go up , guaranteed cash values , and will be around when you need it as long as you pay the premiums . It also has what is called non-forfeiture values . If you stop making payments and the policy has cash value you can : 1 . Let the policy go on extended term which will provide the full face amount for a period until the cash value runs out . 2 . Take a reduced paid up policy for whatever the cash value will buy . 3 . Cash the policy in . Universal Life has Flexible Premiums , you can change the amount you put into the plan . Flexible Death Benefit , you can change the death benefit , reducing it or if your health is good increase the benefit without having to purchase a new policy . Universal Life has a guaranteed interest rate , not guaranteed cash value . Since the premiums are flexible the danger is in under funding the policy which will make the policy lapse , even if you are making premium payments . Universal Life is basically term insurance with a cash value side fund combined into one package . If there is not enough cash in the policy side fund to pay for the term insurance the policy lapses . It is important to make sure you are properly funding the Universal Life policy by paying at least the Target Premium . Each year you will receive an annual statement showing the cost of the term insurance and the amount of cash in the policy . Have your agent review this with you at least every two years to make sure it is performing as planned . As you can see , while the Universal Life has some attractive features , Whole Life is a safer more stable product .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Does A Widow Qualify For Medicare ?
A widow will qualify for Medicare when they turn age 65 . This assumes the widow or the spouse worked and is a US citizen or permanent resident of the United States . The person would get Medicare Part A & B plus they should consider a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- . Medicare Part A is typically free and covers hospital care . Medicare Part B has a premium of around $ 105 per month for most people which covers doctors and tests . Medicare Supplement Plans can vary based on which plan and what state a person lives in . For more information or to run a Medicare Supplement quote visit our website .
A widow will qualify for Medicare when they turn age 65 . This assumes the widow or the spouse worked and is a US citizen or permanent resident of the United States . The person would get Medicare Part A & B plus they should consider a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- . Medicare Part A is typically free and covers hospital care . Medicare Part B has a premium of around $ 105 per month for most people which covers doctors and tests . Medicare Supplement Plans can vary based on which plan and what state a person lives in . For more information or to run a Medicare Supplement quote visit our website .
The letter D after a Medicare number stands for Aged Widow , age 60 or over . -LRB- Their idea of `` aged '' does not agree with mine ! -RRB- If there is a 1 after the D , it stands for Aged WidowER , age 60 or over . A 2 or 3 after the D stands for Second Claimant for the Aged Widow or Widower , respectively . And a 6 after the D stands for Surviving Divorced Wife , age 60 or over .
The letter D is part of some claim numbers . A plain letter D means `` Aged Widow , age 60 or over '' . D1 means `` Aged Widower , age 60 or over '' . D2 means `` Aged widow , second claimant '' . D3 means `` Aged Widower , second claimant '' . D6 means `` Surviving Divorced Wife , age 60 or over '' .
The letters at the end of your Medicare number are used as designations that describe how you qualified for Medicare . The letter A means you were a Social Security wage earner . The letter W means you are a widower of an eligible spouse , W1 a widower . Letter M is someone who is covered under Part A only .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Just as a simple direct answer , a college student should know that life insurance is the most important insurance product once you find a loved one that depends on you . Too many widows and widowers are financially devastated at a loss of a spouse or loved one . Life insurance is the most affordable at a young age . Buy as much as you can afford as early as possible . I have never seen a widow turn down a beneficiary claim check because it was too much money .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 1 1/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
You can not get on Medicare before age 65 unless you are on Social Security Disability and have Lou Gehrig 's Disease ; have been receiving Social Security Disability benefits for 24 months ; or you have worked long enough in a federal , state or local government job and meet the requirements of the Social Security Disability program . Some disabled widows and widowers , or divorced disabled persons , may be able to get Medicare under age 65 under some conditions .
Retirement should be about reducing stress . In order to do this we need to evaluate those things that could happen and develop strategies for dealing with them . At a minimum this will mean maintaining proper insurance coverage on your auto and home . It well might mean purchasing life insurance for the specific purpose of creating a legacy for those you love . If you do that you can spend your assets without any thought of conserving them for your heirs . The most pressing risk according to surveys is the risk of living too long . None of us wants to run out of money . The possibility of living a long time in retirement is quite high . Imbedded in this risk is the likelihood of a needing medical care and custodial care . Another risk is the result of the economy . It could go through major shifts and investments might have a period of decline that could jeopardize your retirement . At that point it is unlikely that you would be able to do anything about it as our ability to work diminishes with every passing year . Another risk that we face is that we could lose our spouse . This is inevitable but it could come sooner rather than later and that could have a profound impact on available money and support . Widows are often faced with very tough economic realities . Long term care requirements are the number one reason why a wealthier person would run out of assets in retirement . There are several strategies to address this risk including long term care insurance . There are several things a person can do to increase their income in retirement . One of the most significant things is to carefully select the date when social security and pension benefits start . The social security benefits increase the longer a worker waits up to the age of 70 . This increases the benefit to a widow as well , should the worker die first . People often own a home . The value of a home minus the mortgage is known as home equity . This home equity can be used to derive income . A reverse mortgage can be put in place that will allow a person to remain in their home and yet withdraw loans against the home for income in retirement . The need for tax planning certainly doesnt end at retirement . There are tax-saving decisions available that will expand income . Your assets are not all taxed in the same way and by converting assets to income in a tax wise manner can save a great deal and expand spendable income in retirement . In all strategies there are trade-offs . If you take a reverse mortgage on the home the amount you can leave your children declines . There will be years in which medical expenses will greatly reduce your taxable income . A Roth IRA provides income that isnt subject to tax which could be a benefit to keep your income in a lower income tax rate bracket . One of the things that I think is most important in developing strategies for retirement is to establish decision points . These are dates or times when you and your spouse or perhaps including your children decide on where you will live , who will provide care if necessary , what assets can be gifted and other important decisions . I am getting ready for one of those conferences even as I write this . It is important to make decisions before there is a crisis . A widow told me a few days ago that moving out of her home into a down-sized facility was one of the most difficult tasks she had ever performed . The emotional and physical toll was enormous . She had planned to make the move several years in the future and she is convinced that she would hot have been able to make the decision , let along , and make the move at that later date . Decide now when you will downsize . Decide now who will assist you or when you will begin to get outside help . There are so many decisions and it is always best to make them before it is absolutely necessary . These decisions can have a profound effect on insuring the financial success of your retirement .
There is no blackout period in life insurance . The term , `` blackout period '' refers to the period of time when a widow or widower are left without income because they can not draw on their deceased spouse 's Social Security benefits -LRB- due to their children no longer being dependents , and the surviving spouse not yet old enough to draw on their own Social Security -RRB- . Some survivors use life insurance proceeds as income during this time .
Yes , you can contribute to a 401k and IRA in the same year . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , it might be a good strategy to put in enough to qualify for the full employer match before contributing to an IRA . There are income qualifying rules for the traditional IRA . For married filing jointly or qualifying widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- is less than $ 181,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 181,000 and $ 191,000 your contribution amount is reduced . For single , head of household or married filing separately and you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year , if your MAGI is less that $ 114,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 114,000 and $ 129,000 your contribution amount is reduced . Traditional IRAs have a maximum age contribution limit of 70 and you must begin Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turned age 70 . Roth IRAs have no age limits for contribution and have no RMD at age 70 . This could mean you have two RMDs in the same year . If you or your spouse participates in an employer sponsored retirement plan such as a 401k , the ability to deduct a contribution to a traditional IRA hinges on what your MAGI is on your tax return along with your filing status . There are some rather complicated formulas that relate to this and you should definitely seek advice from your tax preparer on anything tax related . As always , you should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
If you were married to a Medicare eligible spouse for at least 10 years , you may qualify for Medicare . If you are widowed , and have not remarried , and you were married to your spouse at least 9 months before your spouse 's death , you may be eligible for Medicare benefits under a spouse provision .
If you OR YOUR SPOUSE have enough work history with Social Security wages you can qualify for Medicare Part A and Part B. Likewise , if you are divorced and you were married for at least 10 years and your spouse is eligible for Social Security you may be eligible for Medicare . If you are widowed , and you were married to your spouse at least 9 months before your spouse died and you are single , you may be eligible for Medicare .
The following people are eligible to apply for USAA Auto insurance : Active , retired and honorably separated officers and enlisted personnel of the U.S. military . Officer candidates in commissioning programs -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . Adult children whose eligible parents have or had a USAA auto or property insurance product . Widows and widowers of USAA members who have or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy . If you or your spouse served in the military , you will need to provide the following information for that person : Date of birth Social Security number USAA number Military enlistment , commissioning , retirement or separation date
To get USAA insurance , you must be a member of USAA . To be eligible to be a member of USAA , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You are an officer or enlisted personnel in the US military , or are retired or honorably separated from the US military . 2 -RRB- You are an officer candidate in a commissioning program -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You are an adult child whose parent has or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy , . 4 -RRB- You are a widow or widower of a USAA member who had a USAA auto or property insurance policy .
Persons who are members of USAA are eligible for USAA life insurance . Here are some ways to be eligible -LRB- only one is necessary -RRB- : 1 -RRB- You are an officer or enlisted personnel in the US military , or are retired or honorably separated from that service . 2 -RRB- You are an officer candidate in a commissioning program -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You are an adult child whose parent has or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy , or a widow or widower of a USAA member who had a USAA auto or property insurance policy .
Their recent T.V. commercials are pretty good , with the people of all ages , who state that they have a USAA policy through various military service and family connections . The first level of those who are eligible for their policies are active , retired and/or enlisted U.S. military personnel . Also eligible are Officer Candidate personnel , such as ROTC and other military service candidate programs . Additionally , the adult -LRB- 18 + age -RRB- children of parents who either had or currently have a USAA auto or home product and widows or widowers of former USAA auto and home policyholders are eligible .
One example of key person life insurance would be to guarantee a quick and easy sale of the business upon the owner 's death . For example If the owner has a wife and children that are not active in the business and would have no idea how to run it , they would probably sell it in a distressed manner if the owner died unexpectedly . If he has a key manager that would be the likely person to sell it to they can purchase a life insurance policy on the owner 's life with the key man as the policy owner . The business can bonus the money to pay the premium to the key man . An attorney will write up a buy-sell agreement and the if the owner dies , his manager has the money and an agreed on price to buy the business from the widow . This makes the transition much easier for the widow PLUS has the benefit of keeping your key employee from straying off and being attracted to greener pastures . When there are multiple business owners , they each need a life policy on each other plus a legal agreement so they can buy out the spouse 's interests if one of them dies . They do n't want a business partner just because she/he happened to be married to their former business partner .
A whole life insurance policy is an extremely flexible product that can meet many needs in retirement . The most obvious need is death . It is obvious that retirement always ends in death . Death is not inexpensive . The proceeds of a whole life insurance policy can pay off some or all of those expenses . After a certain age term policies can not be written at any price . I recently had a client who forgot that there was a life policy on her husband . She was paying his funeral expenses on an installment plan . I discovered the policy and brought it to her attention . She was delighted . Another use of a whole life policy is to transfer property to heirs . Often a person will want to leave money to children , grandchildren or a favorite charity . They will then try to conserve their retirement assets so that money will be available when the die . Unfortunately they often rob themselves of lifes simple pleasures in their drive to provide that inheritance . A life insurance policy can do that at the beginning of retirement leaving the person the balance of assets to spend as they wish . Some people have estates that are subject to estate tax . The problem with estate tax is that if there isnt cash to pay the taxes , assets are often sold at below market value to pay the tax . Having cash can make the difference of keeping the family business going , maintaining the family farm or closing them up for taxes . Since that can happen at any time , a whole life policy is particularly flexible in that regard . Whole life insurance is often used when a person wants to leave a specific valuable asset to one child but wants to treat all the children in the same manner . The heirs that are not going to get that valuable asset could receive equivalent proceeds from a whole life policy and everyone would be happy . A whole life policy is often used to purchase the interest of another party in a business . In this case the surviving partners dont particularly want to share everything with a widow who may not be acquainted with the business . A whole life policy can provide the cash to take care of that situation by giving the survivors the funds they need to purchase the widows interests . Sometimes whole life insurance is used to fund day to day living expenses in retirement . I just finished a comparison that showed that a whole life policy performed as well as a fixed annuity in accumulating money for retirement and that it did that with the promise to pay the full benefit should the person die before retiring . The whole life policy has non-forfeiture provisions which can pay a lifetime stream of income if desired or the policy would also give the person the flexibility to use the policy in other ways depending upon future , unforeseen events . This may sound strange but I often get requests for whole life insurance from older individuals . They seem to appreciate the value of lasting protection at a fixed price .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Ownership Of A Life Insurance Policy Mean ?
In addition to Peggy Maces comments , ownership is like title . There are legal issues involved and sometimes it is important to correctly title a life insurance policy . At a minimum the values of the insurance policy are the property of the owner neither the insured nor the beneficiary .
Ownership of a life insurance policy refers to the person who is allowed to make changes to the policy . The owner can be the person whose life is insured , or the owner can be someone else who has a financial interest in the life of the Insured . The owner can change the beneficiaries and features of the policy without consent from the Insured , Beneficiaries , or Payor .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
If the policyowner dies before the insured , the ownership would go to the contingent owner -LRB- if one was desginated -RRB- . If no contingent owner was designated , the policy ownership would then go into the estate and become an asset to the estate - from there it will have to go through the probate process . The Will -LRB- if one was left -RRB- would then designate who gets the asset . If the policyowner dies intestate -LRB- meaning they did not have a will -RRB- , a judge would have to sign off on who gets the asset -LRB- the insurance policy in this case -RRB- . Once new ownership has been established , the owner would then have the option to keep the policy going or cash it out -LRB- if applicable - term insurance does not build cash value , permanent insurance policies do -RRB- . If cashed out , the amount received would be the cash value less any applicable surrender charges , outstanding loan balances , or interest on the loans . The insured does not have the ability to cash out the policy unless they were the policyowner .
That is a great question ! In insurance speak , an `` assignment '' means that something has been transferred to someone else . An `` irrevocable assignment '' means that transfer is permanent , and can not be undone . So an `` irrevocable assignment '' of a life insurance policy means that the policy is transferred from one party to the ownership of another . That second party now has the rights to change the beneficiaries , and all other rights that go with the ownership of the policy . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
An incident of ownership of life insurance is the right of the person holding that title to : Change the beneficiary of the policy Transfer the ownership of the policy Borrow from the policy Use the collateral of the policy for a loan Modify the policy Terminate the policy When someone has an incident of ownership in life insurance , the proceeds from the policy can be counted as part of the estate . Some people transfer ownership of their life insurance policies to an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust to avoid estate taxes .
Life insurance is personal property . The ownership of personal property has an inherent tax potential for earnings above basis and the death proceeds in corporate business and estate scenarios . In community property states , policy ownership takes on additional considerations . In a domestic planning scenarios , some advisers recommend cross ownership between married couples . In estate planning , they recommend that an irrevocable life insurance trust own the policy . In Business scenarios , some recommend holding the policies in separate entities or secular or rabbi trusts . Once the tax exposure of ownership has been analyzed you can determine the ownership issue .
In Canada , if the owner of the policy dies . what happens to the ownership of the policy depends on what the owner had put in place prior to his/her death . If the owner has named a contingent owner the the policy would transfer that way . If their was no contingent owner the the ownership would form part of the estate and be probated . Depending on who the policy ownership was transferred to there could be tax consequences . The cash value is what could be surrendered , the death benefit is not paid until the life insured 's death . NOTE , once the policy has been issued the life insured has no claim on the policy or its cash value , unless the owner gave them the access . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
If by transfer , you mean the changing of ownership , be advised of the potential taxable event if there is gain the policy . Order an in force ledger and have it reviewed intandemwith the original policy and the last annual policy statement . Having an insurance and tax professional review these documents can assist you in determining the economicviabilityof the transfer . If by transfer you mean , exchanging the present policy under the 1035 rules for a new policy without changing ownership or the insured , you can do that.Whetheryou should that or not is another question . Seek out an insurance and tax professional before moving forward with a transfer or exchange . We can help with that .
Life insurance is personal property . Policy ownership or change in ownership dictates transfer of property , which may or may not have taxable consequences . This assumes that the policy owner is not the policy insured . In general terms , the death of a married policy owner with no other testament dictates would cause the policy to go into his or her estate and through the marital deduction pass on to the spouse , who could then have the policy ownership changed to their name . Always seek legal counsel when considering ownership changes in personal property .
Only the owner of a life insurance policy can change ownership of the policy to someone else . If the owner passes away , the ownership of the policy goes to the contingent owner . If no contingent owner was named , the ownership of the policy goes to the estate . There the will , or intestate succession if no will exists , determines ownership .
First of all , I need to stress that you should talk to an estate planning attorney about this topic . We life insurance guys know our way around the block here , but frankly , you should talk to an expert . Same as anything else where you need the best advice possible . Make sure it is an attorney who does specialize in estate planning . Real estate attorneys have their own area of expertise , as do commercial attorneys . Talk to somebody who knows the ins and outs of estate taxation . But , I can talk in generalities . If you own your life insurance , it would be included in your estate . If your spouse owns it , it would be included in his or her estate . Does any of this matter ? It does if you want to avoid or minimize estate taxation when your estate is settled . This means keeping both the state and federal tax people out of the picture to the greatest extent possible . How can you do this ? Well , since the ownership of assets is the key trigger in determining into whose estate money falls , then you can be creative with the ownership designation of your policy . It could be a trust . It could be another relative , such as an adult child . It could be your business . How do you make this decision ? This is where you talk with your estate planning legal expert and explore the ramifications of each choice . Taxation is not your only concern . There are issues related to control of assets as well . With the right guidance , you can put together a plan that gets the job done .
A condominium is a collection of individual home units and common areas along with the land where the building is built . Individual home ownership within a condominium means ownership of only the air space confining the boundaries of the home . The exterior walls , common areas and other property are owned by the condominium association . The result is that a condo policy does not cover anything except the inside of the condominium unit .
Does life insurance money go into an estate ? Well , it can if that 's what the policy owner wants . Most life insurance policies have a stated beneficiary who would receive the proceeds outside of the estate and probate . One seldom thought of aspect of life insurance ownership is that for estate tax purposes the death benefit is valued as an asset for the policy owner . So it is possible for life insurance to be counted as part of an estate unless ownership is elsewhere , like an insurance trust for example .
Great question ! There are several reasons why you might want the ownership transferred . As those fine folks mentioned , tax considerations are a good reason ; The inability to manage the affairs due to declining mental health or the death of the owner is another . Another very common reason is the transferring of ownership from the parent , to the insured child once they are in a position to assume that ownership . In my case , I purchased policies for my kids when they were little -LRB- if you have kids , do it as soon as possible also , and save yourself and them a ton of money over their life -RRB- and will transfer the ownership to them when they are capable of assuming the payments . If you have further questions , I 'm happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
Yes , you can transfer ownership of a life insurance policy . Simply contact the customer service department of your life insurance company , and ask for the form needed to transfer ownership . You can fill it out , sign it , and transfer ownership of the life insurance policy to the person of your choice .
Life insurance is personal property . Personal property has an owner . The ownership of a life insurance policy can be changed and only by the owner of the policy . In the case of permanent cash value policies there two tax items : policy basis and gain . Any change in the ownership could trigger a taxable event or a carry forward of basis . So its important to consider tax consequences of ownership change .
The insureds on the homeowners policy should reflect the legal ownership of the home . Normally the initial insurance policy is ordered by the title company and they make sure that the insured and the title read the same . Subsequent policies from other companies generally like to see a copy of the existing insurance and in that process they pick up the correct ownership of the policy . The one place where this doesnt always happen is when the ownership of the property is transferred to a living trust . The living trust should be included as additional insured at a minimum .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Does It Cost To Get Car Insurance For The First Time ?
There are many factors that contribute to car insurance rates . Experience is one of them but it is n't weighted as heavy as other factors such as credit , driving history , and claims history . Another factor that will weigh heavy on rating would depend on if you are getting insurance for the first time because you just purchased a car or getting it for the first time while owning a vehicle for an extended period of time . As long as you can show proof -LRB- i.e Bill of Sale -RRB- that you made the car purchase without a trade in , most companies will not apply a tremendous surcharge . I recommend that you shop around because every company is different in their standards . I would stick with face-to-face quotes so you can ask all the questions that you have on your first insurance purchase . insurance is one of the few things that a human will outsmart a computer at anytime .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
There are many factors that contribute to car insurance rates . Experience is one of them but it is n't weighted as heavy as other factors such as credit , driving history , and claims history . Another factor that will weigh heavy on rating would depend on if you are getting insurance for the first time because you just purchased a car or getting it for the first time while owning a vehicle for an extended period of time . As long as you can show proof -LRB- i.e Bill of Sale -RRB- that you made the car purchase without a trade in , most companies will not apply a tremendous surcharge . I recommend that you shop around because every company is different in their standards . I would stick with face-to-face quotes so you can ask all the questions that you have on your first insurance purchase . insurance is one of the few things that a human will outsmart a computer at anytime .
The best answer that I was able to locate is fromaskdeb.com . Here it is : Car insurance polices actually evolved from maritime insurance hundreds of years earlier . The policies were to cover any losses and damages that might occur to property that was transported by ship . When the automobile was invented , these marine policies acted as a blueprint for car insurance . The first car insurance policy offered only liability coverage to protect any property that might be damaged by a motor vehicle . This first policy was written by an English insurance company back in 1895 . In the U.S. , the first liability car insurance policy was not written until 1898 and the first policy holder was a Dr. Truman J. Martin . It wasnt until 1927 that Massachusetts became the first state in the U.S. to pass the first mandatory insurance law .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Market value -LRB- what others would pay for same car -RRB- with plus or minus depending on features , condition of vehcle , age , mileage -LRB- thats a big one -RRB- , type of car , quality of car , car been wrecked or under water ... As much as they cost now I recommend that you always get REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE and you get GAP COVERAGE . ALSO , GET EXTENDED WARRANTY FROM THE DEALER . I have been involved in these issues so many times that I still sit down and cry like a baby . People get it in the back so many times just because they are ignorant of coverages that are available to them ... shame shame agents and shame shame tightwad idiots
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Money Can You Make Selling Life Insurance ?
That depends on how hard you work , who you work for , the type of training you receive and your ability to communicate with prospects . And that 's just the tip of the iceberg ! Ultimately , you could make $ 1 million per year or starve . There are many variables and the results will be different for each person . However , the most successful agents , brokers do well by concentrating on the needs of their clients and helping them with personal financial recommendations . The agent/broker that concentrates on how much money they make is doomed for failure .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies make profits much like banks do . They make money off of the products that they sell - all of the policies or annuities will have fees attached to them , that they can profit from . They also make money off the investments that they make while holding your money . They invest in things , just like we do . They can also make money by selling off or buying corporate assets , or divisions , much like corporations do . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
You can make good money selling life insurance , or you can make no money selling life insurance . Those who are really good at it tend to attract more and more clients , and do exceptionally well . On the other hand , those who struggle tend to move on fairly quickly , because it can be a brutal industry if you are not doing well . Most people are paid by commission only , and expenses can easily eat up profits . When there is a split in commissions , the pie often seems too small . Most insurance sales people fall somewhere in the middle and make a decent living at selling life insurance . With some good breaks , they have years where they make good money . And if you like what you are doing , that can be a worthwhile career .
The average life insurance agent makes around $ 40,000 per year . But selling life insurance is like owning your own business . There is no limit and there is no safety net at the bottom either . Most people who get into life insurance never make it past one year . A very few make a whole lot of money . How much one person makes has nothing to do with how much another person will make .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I sell my life insurance policy ? Well , number one , a life insurance policy is personal property . Could you sell it ? I think you can , usually through the life settlement market . But keep in mind that the original reason that you sold the life insurance was not to sell it for that specific purpose and most carriers and life insurance companies are going to take a dim view on you trying to buy insurance for just the purpose of selling it . But if the reason you bought life insurance does n't exist any longer , you could go ahead and sell it on the secondary market of life insurance settlement , and you can sell it for cash . Generally , a cash value contract is going to get a little bit more than what you have in your policy ; sometimes a lot more , depending upon the death benefit and your timeline . Can you sell it ? You could sell it and again , I recommend make sure that you 're doing this for the right reasons . And make sure that your coverage is no longer necessary .
You can make a ton of money selling life insurance . $ 1 million per year . More . A lot more . Of course , a number of factors have to fall into place . Here is my list of those factors that can fuel your propulsion toward making that kind of money : Dedicate yourself to selling life insurance . If you treat it as an ordinary job , then it wont be worth the aggravation . Treat it as the noble profession it is . There is virtue in making sure that the widows and orphans among us are self-sufficient , and dont have to ask for handouts . Commit to being the nicest person you can be . You are , after all , helping people face their own mortality . Be sensitive about that . Take a zen approach to selling : the sale you dont desire is the sale you will get . Should you want the sale ? Sure . Do you need the sale ? Sure . But perspective is essential . In the big scheme of things , this is only a sale . Dont get too attached to it . Become a true expert . Establish yourself as the go-to guy for this product . When somebody has a question about life insurance , your opinion should have the most authority . Specialize . Every other financial professional wants to be a jack of all trades and master of none . But let me ask you this : if you were willing to spend $ 100,000 on your own life insurance policy , would you hire a true specialist or at a mere generalist to get the job done right for you ? To drive home the point : lets suppose you wanted to spend $ 1 million on a new mansion . Would you hire a master builder , or a plumber that had also expanded into construction work ? Integrity , integrity , integrity . Your word should be gold . When you give somebody a quote , they should get approved at that rate . Period . View yourself as an elite producer . Why shouldnt you land a big fish on a regular basis ? If you really have put in the work to make yourself a master of your trade , then those big cases should come to you . Build a great organization . Make sure you can deliver superior service throughout every stage of the life insurance purchasing process . Open your own brokerage , or affiliate with good distributors . Or put together some hybrid of both . Lead a normal life . Too many salesmen divorce their wives and marry their business . Wrong priorities . And take the best care of yourself . Make yourself physically strong and mentally tough , and you will have the endurance needed to succeed . Big time . Ready - set - change . The world is shifting in all different directions . If you chart the right path , you can keep up with it . More than that , you can make it work for you . When I started in this business , I developed a local clientele . I saw every client personally , and was armed with a rate sheet and a few computer printouts . Two appointments , then a sale . All over the kitchen table or business counter . Now I do business across the country , and engage people through email , social media , and cell phones . Lots of ways to connect , to educate , to serve . Its taken some time to get used to the newest ways of doing business . But you know what ? If you let your traditional values guide you in your use of new technology , you will be a winner . Many times over . Just keep finding ways to keep the customer satisfied . Stay connected and build strong relationships . Keep educating , and keep serving . People should be able to find you on their desktop , on their laptop , and in their cell phone . Make it easy for them to tell you whats on their mind . To tell you their problems . So you can solve them . You will get many clients that way , and a lot of them will spend a lot of money on life insurance .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question is : is selling my life insurance policy a good option for cash ? Well , it is an option for cash , and if you 've owned it for over two years or more , there 's probably a little bit easier way to sell that . It is personal property . You do own it , and I say if your reason for having life insurance still exists , you need to keep it , but if your reason for life insurance , why you bought it , has no longer existing then you may want to look at it about cash . There are several companies out there that will buy your policy depending upon how much you 've put into , your age , and your actual life expectancy . That 's how much you 're going to get for that policy . Is it an option ? Is it personal property for you to sell ? It is , and you should look at this as a last resort , as a backstop for cash reserves in your portfolio . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
Well it all depends on the company they work for . But most agents make a small amount of money selling an auto policy . They count on the Renewals to run there agency . you can always ask your agent how much he will make selling your auto insurance . But typically its betten % 5 - % 10 of the policy premium .
Life insurance is not hard to sell . It 's actually very easy to sell . When you 're selling life insurance the main part of your job is prospecting for the right people . You are looking for the people who are aware that they need life insurance . Think of it this way . If you were selling swimming pools it would be very hard to sell them to 90 % of the people . But if you talked only to people who own homes , had yards and been thinking about buying a swimming pool it would be pretty easy to sell them . Selling life insurance is the same way . It 's very easy to sell to the right people and it 's impossible to sell to the wrong people .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
One example of key person life insurance would be to guarantee a quick and easy sale of the business upon the owner 's death . For example If the owner has a wife and children that are not active in the business and would have no idea how to run it , they would probably sell it in a distressed manner if the owner died unexpectedly . If he has a key manager that would be the likely person to sell it to they can purchase a life insurance policy on the owner 's life with the key man as the policy owner . The business can bonus the money to pay the premium to the key man . An attorney will write up a buy-sell agreement and the if the owner dies , his manager has the money and an agreed on price to buy the business from the widow . This makes the transition much easier for the widow PLUS has the benefit of keeping your key employee from straying off and being attracted to greener pastures . When there are multiple business owners , they each need a life policy on each other plus a legal agreement so they can buy out the spouse 's interests if one of them dies . They do n't want a business partner just because she/he happened to be married to their former business partner .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What is the best Whole Life Policy ? While there is no direct answer to this , the best answer is whatever policy will best protect your family . There are different types of whole life policies . The most common is ordinary whole life , also called `` straight Life '' or `` Permanent '' -LRB- cash value -RRB- Insurance . You pay a level premium for the rest of your life , as long as you are making your monthly premiums . The premium never increases and your policy accumulates cash value . How much life insurance -LRB- death benefit -RRB- will you need ? That determines on a number of factors such as : Do you have any children/grandchildren you want to leave money to ? How much of your income does your spouse depend on ? Who depends on you financially ? How much debt do you owe ? Do you want to leave money to your favorite charity ? You want to make sure you buy enough life insurance to cover your financial obligations if an unexpected or untimely death occurs . It is also important your premium fit 's within your budget . Because if you ca n't afford it , it is n't any good for you or your family . An insurance agent is the best person to get with to compare the different types of life insurance and find a policy that best suits your situation . I work with many top insurance carriers with the most competitive rates . I 'll do the shopping for you ! Thank you & Be Well , Mendy Douglas www.iflretirement.com/mendy-douglas/
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
How many insurance policies can you have ? You can have as many as insurance companies will sell you . While first thought is unlimited for most , actually insurance companies check and see how much insurance you have in place , how much you 're applying for with them and other companies and make a decision based on what they find . It is not an unlimited option .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Medical Tests Are Required For Life Insurance ?
If applying for a medically underwritten life insurance policy , a paramed exam is generally given . For most applicants , this involves a blood test and urine test . If applying for a large face amount or if the applicant is past middle age , the underwriting requirements may also include a resting EKG , a treadmill EKG , or possibly exam by medical doctor . If applying for No Exam life insurance , none of these tests are required .
Medicare Part B-covered Diabetes Supplies : Blood sugar -LRB- also called blood glucose -RRB- self-testing equipment and supplies are covered as durable medical equipment for all people with Medicare Part B who have diabetes , even if you dont use insulin . Self-testing supplies include : Blood sugar monitors Blood sugar test strips Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions for checking the accuracy of testing equipment and test strips . Medicare Part B covers the same type of blood sugar testing supplies for people with diabetes whether or not they use insulin . However , the amount of supplies that are covered varies . If you use insulin , you may be able to get up to 300 test strips and 300 lancets every 3 months . If you dont use insulin , you may be able to get 100 test strips and 100 lancets every 3 months . If your doctor says its medically necessary , Medicare will allow you to get additional test strips and lancets . Medically necessary means that services or supplies are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your medical condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice . You may need to keep a record that shows how often youre actually testing yourself .
What tests are run for life insurance depends on the coverage applied for and vary somewhat by company . For smaller amounts there may just be a non-medical declaration and depending on whether or not anything is declared there may be no testing . If urine , and/or blood , is required , testing could include testing for bodily functions . The presence of raised levels of certain substances , such as sugar in urine , would trigger more tests . In addition , testing is done for nicotine and for traces of illegal drugs . X-rays , electrocardiograms or other tests could also be required . It is very important to be truthful when completing an application for insurance . If you have a medical condition you are concerned about , then experience and independence are important . I suggest working with a local agent/broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Marijuana use is and has been prevalent in the United States for a very long time . It is the most widely used of all recreational drugs today , and is used by people of all walks of life . Its active chemical , commonly known as THC has been proven to help those with rheumatic diseases , ocular conditions or certain mental illnesses and is a known relaxant . Whatever your stance is on the use of illegal drugs , it is likely that at some time in your life you have encountered marijuana , and for many it remains a concern when applying for insurance . Does the use of Marijuana make me ineligible for life insurance ? If you use marijuana , you may be a little concerned about taking the required exam to get term life insurance fearing that if marijuana use is detected , you may be ineligible for coverage . Fear not . Marijuana use , by itself is not something that will make you ineligible , but it is something that is tested for . Of course , the results of the test may come back negative , but the questionnaire will probably also ask whether you have used any illegal drugs in the past five years . If the answer is yes , again , you should be able to qualify for life insurance . If marijuana shows up in your blood test , the chances that you will be able to qualify for the most desirable rating class are somewhat diminished , and if they show up not all at -LRB- but you answer yes to the question about marijuana use -RRB- your chances are diminished somewhat . Will I get a smokers rate if I use or have used marijuana ? Each life insurance company follows different guidelines , but generally , you will not be charged smokers rates for life insurance if you have used or are currently using marijuana . If my life insurance blood tests positive for marijuana use , will this information be reported to law enforcement or the government in any way ? No . By law , your medical records are protected . The report will go to the MIB , but you give your consent to this when you fill out the life insurance application . The MIB stands for Medical Information Bureau , and it is a non-governmental agency which provides services to health and life insurance companies across the U.S. . The information submitted to the MIB is not accessible to the government . Is there any way to get life insurance without taking a blood test ? Yes ! There is something called No-Exam life insurance which does not require an exam of any kind . Depending on the amount applied for and whether they require a blood test for that amount they will . The question about drugs is always on the application regardless of amount so if you were to answer honestly -LRB- suggested -RRB- they would know . In some cases you are simply rated as a smoker . Other companies may decline you . I suggest you work with a broker who knows what to look for in a company .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test If you 're an older individuals -LRB- e.g. age 55 -RRB- , some carriers may also ask for an EKG to be completed with the other exam requirements . If you 're a senior -LRB- e.g. age 70 -RRB- , some carriers may ask you to complete a mature assessment -LRB- congnitive and physical movement testing - e.g. memory tests , walk a distance , etc. -RRB- . Exams typically take no more than a half hour or so and can be completed in the privacy of your own home -LRB- some people prefer their work place which is also acceptable -RRB- . You do n't have to go to a doctor 's office or a clinic to have the exams done . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . Please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance companies use a urine test , blood test , physical measurements and possibly a resting EKG to evaluate your overall health and your risk of death . A urine test is most commonly used to test for drugs or alcohol , but may also be used to test for certain medical conditions . A larger death benefit may require additional testing .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , any life insurance company that requires a blood test , urine test , or oral swab in order to get a life insurance policy will test for the presence of illegal drugs and cotinine -LRB- an indicator of cigarette use -RRB- . This is called a medically underwritten policy . If using a No Exam policy , they do not require an exam and do not test for drugs , although they will usually ask about drug use on the application .
I specialize in HIV Life Insurance and most of the people I have spoken to think it is always better to be tested anonymously when you get tested because if you test positive then the chances are it will end up in your MIB file forever . As far as a HIV test for Life Insurance if you know your positive then do n't waste your time on a company you know tests for HIV . It is not a requirement for every company . I actually offer a Group Life Insurance policy through a membership that comes with $ 10,000 in life insurance and you can buy-up to $ 100,000 in $ 10,000 increments . It is very affordable and the only requirement is that you work 30 hours or more a week and live in the USA and not in AK , MT , SD , UT VT , or WA CONTACT me for more info
Life insurance carriers that require a blood and/or urine test to get a medically underwritten policy will test for indication of drug use . Some carriers , including Met Life , offer the option of a policy that does not require a blood or urine test . However , those carriers then usually require that the use of illegal substances be admitted on the application .
If applying for a medically underwritten life insurance policy , a paramed exam is generally given . For most applicants , this involves a blood test and urine test . If applying for a large face amount or if the applicant is past middle age , the underwriting requirements may also include a resting EKG , a treadmill EKG , or possibly exam by medical doctor . If applying for No Exam life insurance , none of these tests are required .
Hepatitis C is not tested for on a life insurance exam , per se . However , the blood test used for life insurance exams does test liver function by measuring liver enzymes . A high value for AST , SGOT , ALT , and/or GGT could cause the underwriter to question the presence of hepatitis C. Medical records may need to be ordered , or you might be required to have further testing before being able to obtain a medically underwritten policy . If you go into the application process knowing you have hepatitis C , be sure to tell your agent so they can find you a policy for which you qualify at the best possible price .
When applying for a policy that uses medical underwriting , most life insurance companies test for smoking through both a urine test and a blood test on samples collected during the life insurance exam . If you are purchasing a policy that does not require taking an exam , neither of these tests are done .
A life insurance urine test along with a blood test with larger policies are checking for two categories . The first series is looking for drugs , both illegal and prescription to test against medical records for abuse . Underwriting will test for nicotine and cotine , which stays in the system longer than just nicotine for tobacco use . The second set of tests are used to check for diseases like cancer , diabetes , heart disease , blood disorders , kidney disease , etc. . These results are usually compared to the individuals medical records for their risk assessment .
Not every life insurance company requires a drug test on every policy . Each provider has different underwriting criteria and rules . The policy size and your age at time of application determine the type of medical testing that may be required . A small policy may be simplified issue : just answer a short list of medical questions . A very large policy will require lengthier questions , along with blood and stool samples .
A medical exam for the coverage typically consists of a paramedical exam -LRB- height/weight check and vitals checks such as pulse and blood pressure readings -RRB- , a blood test , and a urine test - sometimes an EKG and/or cognitive testing may be required for older age individuals -RRB- . Even if it 's not asked specifically on the application itself , the carrier will see the input regarding the wls -LRB- I 'm assuming stands for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- surgery in the APS from your doctor . For any fully underwritten life insurance program , the carrier will request a copy of an APS from your doctor , in addition to the completion of a medical exam conducted for the insurance policy -RRB- . An APS is an Attending Physician Statement - in short , it 's a doctor 's summary of your medical history records . For example , if you were being treated for diabetes , it would cite your A1C reading history , prescriptions prescribed for the condition , when it was diagnosed , etc. . In the APS , the carrier will see in the doctor 's notes that you have discussed getting the wls surgery -LRB- I 'm assuming that `` wls '' is supposed to stand for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- and ask if a surgery has been scheduled and/or completed . If it has n't been completed yet , a carrier will postpone approving you for the coverage because you have an outstanding medical procedure on the books that 's still supposed to get done . From a carrier 's perspective , their risk of a claim is greatly increased when they know a surgical operation is upcoming as complications can always occur during any surgery . Please note , after a weight loss surgery procedure and you 've ideally lost a large amount of weight and want to apply for coverage , part of that weight loss can be added in to a carrier 's calculation of height/weight profile . The reason for this is quick weight loss for people -LRB- whether via surgery , diet and exercise , liposuction , etc. -RRB- can often result in some individuals gaining a percentage of that weight back - unfortunately not everyone always keeps all of the pounds off . So if you apply for coverage within 12 months of that rapid weight loss , a carrier may add half the weight loss amount back to your total . For example , if you weight 300 pounds and loss 120 pounds after a procedure , now you 're sitting at 180 pounds . If you applied for coverage soon after having lost that 120 pounds , the carrier would add 60 back to your total and base the underwriting on a height/weight profile of 240 pounds -LRB- 180 +60 -RRB- . The purpose of the 12 month differential is to show stability in the person 's weight loss and that they have a good chance of keeping off the weight . Please also note , alternative options will still result in the same outcome -LRB- e.g. non-medical life insurance -RRB- because a question on almost every application will ask in some format `` are there any outstanding tests or other medical procedures outstanding or waiting to be completed '' . You would only be able to secure a graded policy with a low face amount -LRB- $ 25k or $ 50k maximum -RRB- , which does not appear to be in the ballpark of the coverage you 're looking to secure -LRB- you noted $ 900k in your question 's statement -RRB- . If you have a policy already in force , you can elect to convert all or a portion of it to permanent coverage . The conversion would keep the risk class that the original policy had and would simply just calculate the rates based on your age . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A will cover blood tests done as an inpatient in a hospital or skilled nursing or rehab facility , and Part B will cover blood tests done as an outpatient in any setting , when the blood tests are ordered to diagnose or monitor a condition or disease . Medicare Part A and B does not ordinarily cover routine blood screening . However , some preventative screenings have recently been added to the blood tests that are covered under Medicare part B : diabetes screening for those who are high risk for diabetes , one blood test every 5 years to test cholesterol , HIV tests for those who are high risk or pregnant , and prostate cancer screening yearly . For specifics see this brochure : WEBSITELINK
A life insurance policy could be denied for any of the following reasons : 1 -RRB- The applicant 's health was not controlled . This can be anything from someone with diabetes having an A1C over 10 , to someone with cancer having only months to live . 2 -RRB- The applicant 's health has not been stable for a certain length of time . This can range from someone who had very high blood pressure and only been on medication for one month , to someone with MS who has had a recent major exacerbation . 3 -RRB- The applicant is planning to have major medical testing or procedure done in the near future . In other words , if your doctor has scheduled a test to see if you have Parkinson 's , you will need to wait until after the test to apply . If you have gastric bypass surgery scheduled in two months , the insurance company will ask that you wait until after your surgery to apply . 4 -RRB- The applicant has had a recent bankruptcy that has not been discharged , has undergone recent drug or alcohol treatment , has had numerous traffic violations in the past year , or other non-health related risk factors . The above mostly relate to medically underwritten policies . There are simplified issue policies -LRB- that do not require an exam -RRB- and guaranteed issued policies -LRB- that do not have any requirements -RRB- that can be obtained when a medically underwritten policy will not work . Simplified and guaranteed issue policies do have restrictions on face amounts , you must be in a certain age range to get them , and they are not available in every state . Thus , some people do apply for simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies and get declined simply because they do not fit the age , or it is not offered in their state . This is most common for persons applying by mail or online . If you enlist the help of a good agent , you can avoid many declines by having proper guidance in the first place .
Life insurance companies are not mind readers , but they do their very best to find out if you smoke . If you have a blood test , urine test , or swab , the presence of nicotine will show up in all those tests . If you have ever taken Chantix or other drugs to help you quit smoking , they will see that on your pharmacy record . If your medical records show that you smoke and you have a health condition that causes underwriters to order your medical records , the insurance company will take the word of what is written in your medical records .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Where Can I Buy Mobile Home Insurance ?
Most companies that offer homeowners insurance also offer homeowners coverage for mobile homes . If you are working with a local agent they will normally have more than one company available to them to be able to place a risk . Contact your local agent today and they will help direct you the company and policy that will best work for you .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
A Mobile Home Insurance policy is similar to a Homeowners ' in that it provides some of the same kind of coverage . It is , however , specifically designed to meet the unique needs of a Mobile Home owner . Coverage on the structure itself can be determined in many cases by the purchase price , if it is fairly new , but there are specially designed toold available to estimate ther replacement value . Some considerations that may affect pricing that are different from a Homeowners ' policy are items such as how the Mobile Home is situated . For example , what kind of tie downs are used ? Is it on a permanent foundations ? Is it in an approved park facility ? Ask if there is additional coverage available for awnings , canapies , etc. .
If you are not financing the mobile home or the local homeowners association or mobile home park do n't require it , nope , you do n't need it . But if you do n't want to pay out of pocket for damage or destruction to your home and your personal belongings , do n't want to haved to pay for you own defense when someone sues you for accidental injury , then yes , you do need it . So it becomes a question of what do you want .
Manufactured home insurance is homeowners insurance that will insure a manufactured home . A manufactured home could be a mobile home or a factory home kit that is assembled on site . This would be different then a frame or traditional home that is built from scratch on site . Other then the term the coverage 's are relatively the same . Insurance providers generally have a policy that is specifically designed for manufactured homes .
Medicare will pay for in home care if the home health agency providing it is Medicare approved , the patient receiving it is following a doctor 's care plan and receiving services such as PT or OT , and the person is home bound . In a nutshell , this means that it is very difficult or detrimental for the person to leave home due to their condition , and they need assistance of another person or mobility device to do so . Medicaid payment of home health services vary depending on each state . Under federal Medicaid rules , coverage of home health services must include part-time nursing , HCA services , and medical supplies and equipment .
Average Homeowners Insurance Rates were $ 876 Nationwide in 2013 . This average figure is of no assistance when trying to assess each individual risk ; many carriers have a minimum annual premium of $ 300 and it is common for High Value Properties to pay an annual premium exceeding $ 10,000 . When one asks about Homeowners Insurance , it is common that he or she includes mobile homes , manufactured homes , rental homes , condos , townhomes and high value estate properties ; in fact , each of these different types of properties are written on a different form creating differentiating underwriting scenarios . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Your home insurance would probably cover your mobile phone but it would be subject to your deductible -LRB- the portion YOU are responsible for before your policy kicks in -RRB- which would nORMALLY be HIGHER than the cost of a mobile phone . DO n't you have insurance on your phone from your service provider ? Cheaper way to go and less deductible .
Homeowners insurance for a mobile is not much different than regular homeowners insurance . Some of the information that is required to be able to secure coverage will be a different though . Mobile home homeowners coverage is not something that every carrier does . To find out more about coverage and pricing in your are please contact a local agent for a free quote .
Medicare Part B does offer coverage for motorized mobility devices -LRB- scooters -RRB- in certain situations . You must be evaluated by a doctor and your doctor must certify that you need a mobility device . The scooter must be used for movement primarily around your home and you must have a CMN -LRB- certificate of medical need -RRB- .
The best place to start is a conversation with your Insurance Professional . Talk about your coverage options , the age and value of your Mobile Home . Talk about where it is located and how it is secured to the property . Discuss any specialty items that may need to be included like awnings or porches to be sure you do n't have any gaps in coverage or protection . All of these things may be factors in determining the amount of premium charged for the coverage needed . Be sure to also ask about any and all discounts that may be available by perhaps bundling your car and home together with the same Insurance Company . In general , these policies are not that expensive .
You would be seeking a homeonwers insurance policy . Most carriers have homeowners insurance policies that provide coverage for mobile homes . The type of home will normally be established during the quoting process . Your local agent will ask several questions about the property and details about the home so that they can help direct you to the coverages that are right for you .
Medicare covers many items needed for mobility . These include walkers , wheelchairs and even `` scooter '' . Your doctor must certify that you need a mobility assist device . You should obtain your wheelchair from a Medicare approved DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- supplier that accepts Medicare assignment . Doing so will minimize your out of pocket costs .
Medicare does cover Home Health Care , BUT only if : its ordered by a Medicare approved physician AND the person in incapable of leaving the home AND services are rendered by a Medicare approved provider AND the person requires more than just assistance with activities of daily living -LRB- eating , bathing , dressing , toileting , functional mobility -RRB- . Medicare will not pay for services performed by immediate relatives or members of a patients household . Medicare does not pay for Assisted Living or Adult Day Care . If these conditions are met , Medicare will generally cover medical services in the home as ordered by a Medicare approved physician .
Unfortunately , Geico does not carry Disability Insurance . Geico mainly carries property-casualty insurance , including home , condo , co-op , mobile home , flood , and renter 's insurance ; auto , commercial auto , collector car , motorcycle , ATV , boat , water craft , snowmobile , and umbrella insurance ; overseas and business insurance ; identity theft insurance ; and life insurance from an outside source .
Jim is right . You have to buy the coverage as an add-on to your current policy . If you are eligible to buy from USAA , contact them and tell them you want to add earthquake coverage to your policy . Or if you are signed up to their mobile platform , you can add the coverage to your policy yourself . Unless you live in a high earthquake zone , the premium will be very reasonable .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
There 's many options for mobile home insurance . Some companies will write this on a standard HO-3 form . An example of a price on a $ 100,000 value of the `` dwelling '' would be around $ 350 - $ 500/yr depending upon claims , credit & location of the home .
Renters may move with you if all other underwriting guidelines remain the same . I am assuming that you are moving withing the state and not across state lines . I am assuming that you are not moving to flood zone within the state that require flood insurance . You are also not moving from an apartment to a mobile or trailer home . All things being equal your your renters insurance moves with you .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Urinalysis ?
A urinalysis is a test of the urine . This test is covered under Medicare part B . You will need to have a provider that takes Medicare as a deemed provider . Medicare Part B has a deductible and coinsurance . If you have a Medicare Advantage plan you will have a copay as well .
Urine testing can give indications of kidney disease , but kidneys are involved in more than just renal disease . E.g. Protein in the urine can be a sign of uncontrolled diabetes . Urinalysis can evidence hypertension , or show that the applicant is not complying with treatment for hypertension -LRB- i.e. not taking their blood pressure medication as prescribed -RRB- . Urinalysis is also used to help determine whether the applicant uses tobacco or illegal drugs , or abuses drugs or alcohol .
A urinalysis is a test of the urine . This test is covered under Medicare part B . You will need to have a provider that takes Medicare as a deemed provider . Medicare Part B has a deductible and coinsurance . If you have a Medicare Advantage plan you will have a copay as well .
What happens at a life insurance exam depends on your age , the life insurance company , and the face amount of the policy for which you are applying . If you are young and applying for a small policy , it is possible that all that is needed is answering of medical questions , or a urinalysis along with that . For most people that apply for a medically underwritten life insurance policy , a blood and urine sample are taken ; measurements , weight , blood pressure , pulse , etc are taken ; and health questions are covered . For middle aged to senior persons , a resting EKG may be added . For very large face amounts , the requirements may add include a treadmill EKG for older persons , or possibly a full exam by the applicant 's physician .
The tests that are run for most medically underwritten life insurance policies are urinalysis and CBC -LRB- complete blood count -RRB- . These tests look for abnormalities that may indicate heart disease . blood diseases , kidney disease , liver disease , or diabetes . They also test for HIV and the presence of cotinine -LRB- a byproduct of nicotine -RRB- .
A urinalysis costs approximately $ 35 - $ 60 , depending where you live and what facility is used to conduct the test . Typically , it is part of a routine examination or annual physical . Many items are checked with this type of testincludingyour liver and glucose . If you have existing medical coverage and the test is considered preventive , the insurer may pay for the entire cost .
Since your doctor always orders the same thing , there is a good reason to believe that there is a great deal that a company can tell based upon your blood panel and urinalysis . What is certain is that they determine if you are smoking or using drugs . One of the things that they arent doing , yet , is actually doing a DNA profile . That could come in the future .
The key to this question is insurable interest . You must have a good reason to buy the insurance . Secondly , you will need your fathers cooperation . Your father must complete non-medical information and may have to submit to some routine procedures such as urinalysis , mouth swab or x-ray . There are subcultures in the USA where this is a common practice to prepare for the inevitable expense of the funeral .
Insurance companies must weigh the cost against the benefit of extensive testing of applicants . Urinalysis was the major tool used for many years . In the case of high amounts of coverage blood testing was and is still used . This was largely replaced for many applicants with a mouth swab . Today many companies rely upon self-declared listing of prescription drugs . They can develop a pretty accurate profile of an applicant this way at very little cost .
They test the urine for a metabolite of nicotine called cotinine , in order to see if you are a tobacco user . They also test for cocaine and other illegal drugs . Creatinine or protein in the urine can be an indicator of kidney disease , or a side effect of uncontrolled diabetes , as can high glucose . The insurance company uses the urinalysis to confirm the information you put on the application , and to become aware if there are any hidden or unknown health conditions .
If you are applying for a medically underwritten individual life insurance policy , you should expect to have a blood profile and urinalysis ordered as well as vital signs taken by a paramedical examiner . The lab tests look at body chemistry and will include screening for drugs . A life insurance underwriter is looking for abnormal results which , on their own may not mean much but when compared with additional information collected such as medical history , readings for blood pressure , etc. , it helps them assess mortality risk .
in recent years , a blood profile and urinalysis includes a lot of information when ordered by life insurance companies . The list is long and riddled with chemical names and acronyms : glucose , albumin , protein , cholesterol , liver enzymes , GGTP , PSA , BUN , nicotine , drugs and so on . It continues to evolve over time . A life insurance underwriter is looking for abnormal results which , on their own may not mean much but when compared additional information collected such as medical history , readings for blood pressure , etc. , it helps them assess mortality risk .
When applying for most medically underwritten life policies , an applicant can expect to have a blood profile and urinalysis ordered as well as vital signs taken by a parmedical examiner . The lab tests look at body chemistry . There are lots of chemical names and acronyms such as glucose , albumin , protein , cholesterol , liver enzymes , HIV , GGTP , PSA , BUN , nicotine , drugs and so on . The tests continue to evolve over time and can vary in some cases by insurance company based on age and amount . A life insurance underwriter is looking for abnormal results which , on their own may not mean much but when compared with additional information collected such as medical history , readings for blood pressure , etc. , it helps them assess mortality risk .
A life insurance physical exam is also known as a paramed exam . This is an underwriters opportunity to take a snap shot of an applicant 's current health . A nurse or paramed examiner will come to you and take a health history and perform a few tests . Some of the most common include height , weight , blood pressure , urinalysis , blood draw , mouth swab and pulse . Depending on age and amount of insurance they can require more testing such as an EKG . The paramed examiner submits the report and findings to the underwriter to compare to medical history and doctors records . You will find with underwritten life insurance plans this is a very common practice and is paid for with your normal life insurance premiums . Therefore there is no out of pocket charge for applying .
A trained , professional paramedical examiner performs the exam in your home or office . This routine exam will include taking information about your medical history , height , weight , collecting a urine specimen for urinalysis , blood pressure , pulse and collecting a blood sample . The exam will take about 45 minutes or less . If additional testing is required by the insurance company such as an electrocardiogram -LRB- ECG -RRB- or a chest xray , you will be notified in advance . We recommend scheduling the appointment at the least stressful time of day for you . Blood pressure can be artificially raised by stress . It can also be raised by caffeine , tobacco and alcohol so avoid these for several hours prior . Limit salt intake and rich foods for 24 hours prior to the exam . Fasting for 4-8 hours prior to the exam is also advised -LRB- and may be required -RRB- but drink plenty of water . Finally , avoid strenuous physical activities for 24 hours prior to the exam .
Assume you mean a life insurance paramedical exam rather than a physical performed by a doctor -LRB- not common -RRB- . A trained , professional paramedical examiner performs the exam in your home or office . This routine exam will include taking information about your medical history , height , weight , collecting a urine specimen for urinalysis , blood pressure , pulse and collecting a blood sample . The exam will take about 45 minutes or less . If additional testing is required by the insurance company such as an electrocardiogram -LRB- ECG -RRB- or a chest xray , you will be notified in advance . We recommend scheduling the appointment at the least stressful time of day for you . Blood pressure can be artificially raised by stress . It can also be raised by caffeine , tobacco and alcohol so avoid these for several hours prior . Limit salt intake and rich foods for 24 hours prior to the exam . Fasting for 4-8 hours prior to the exam is also advised -LRB- and may be required -RRB- but drink plenty of water . Finally , avoid strenuous physical activities for 24 hours prior to the exam .
Urinalysis -LRB- UA -RRB- is used by life insurance companies to detect presence of disease when applying for medically underwritten policies . Urine tests used can point to the possibility of kidney disease , UTI , diabetes , liver disease , inflammation , even cancer . Sometimes excessive exercise or dieting can affect the HOS , so try to drink a lot of water , avoid alcohol , eat balanced meals , and avoid excessive exercise in the days before your urine test . Life insurance also uses urine to test for drug and tobacco use . If you use opoids -LRB- codeine , morphine , methadone , etc -RRB- for pain , or marijuana for medical or recreational use , explain that on your application or to the examiner collecting your urine sample . And keep in mind that cotinine -LRB- a metabolite of nicotine that is detected in urine and blood -RRB- can stay in the body for a long time after using tobacco . It is best to disclose all health conditions , medications , and tobacco use to your agent ahead of time , rather than have it be a surprise on your life insurance exam . That way you can be matched with the company that will give you the best rate , your underwriter will rate you as good as possible due to your honesty , and your policy will pay out if something happens to you .
With the blood test , the insurance company checks for nicotine use . With urinalysis they may look for cannabinoids -LRB- marijuana -RRB- , cocaine , amphetamines -LRB- meth , speed -RRB- , opiates -LRB- heroin , codeine , morphine -RRB- , and phencyclidine -LRB- PCP -RRB- . Not all use the same tests . Some use the testing of salvia to test of drugs , and No Exam policies do not do any drug testing .
Yes , life insurance companies use blood profile and urinalysis results to underwrite applicants for life insurance . They also compare what is found to the responses to the life insurance application and , if ordered , the information doctors include in medical records . It is important to answer truthfully . Your life insurance professional can provide the underwriter with background information if necessary to explain your situation for the best possible result .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Does An Annual Deductible Work For Health Insurance ?
A deductible is the amount of money that you would pay before your health insurance kicks in . For example , if you have a $ 3,000 deductible and need to go to the hospital then you would pay the first $ 3,000 . Your insurance would kick in after that . For folks age 65 and over that are on Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement it will work a little differently . The deductible on most of the plans would be smaller and for doctors and tests not the hospital . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
A tough question to answer because it is so subjective , what 's high to one person may quite acceptable to another . As 30 year insurance industry professional I would say that by the standards of 2014 , you are entering `` high deductible '' territory when your plan 's annual deductible exceeds $ 2000 for an individual . When many consumers hear the term high deductible it is often being used as another way of saying this is a health insurance plan designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . The model for this product being that the lower premiums for a high deductible health insurance plan with no copayment features will free up money to fund an HSA and hopefullyaccumulate a health care nest egg for a person 's retirement years . In 2014 the minimum deductible for an HSA based plan is $ 1250 and the maximum deductible is $ 6350 . With the advent of the Affordable Care Act 's -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- health insurance marketplaces in 2014 the consumer is now presented with a whole new array of health insurance plan designs that will certainly meet anyone 's definition of a high deductible plan but that may not be designed to be compatible with an HSA . Extra care and caution needs to be exercised by the consumer in the new world of health insurance and I would recommend seeking out the services of an experienced health insurance brokers in your marketplace to help you find the plan best suited to your needs and budget .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans available to Medicare Beneficiaries . They include Plan A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N with Plan F also offering a high-deductible plan . The most popular standardized Medigap Plans are F , G , and N. Plan F will cover all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , co-insurance or deductibles for Medicare covered costs . If you choose the high-deductible Plan F , you must pay for Medicare covered costs up to the deductible amount of $ 2,140 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- before your Medigap Plan F will pay anything . Plan G will cover all your Medicare approved charges after you have satisfied the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Once the small deductible is met , Medigap Plan G acts like Plan F and covers the co-pays , co-insurance and deductibles that Original Medicare does not cover . Plan N covers 100 % of the Part B co-insurance , except for a small co-pay for some office visits -LRB- never more than $ 20 per visit -RRB- and up to a co-pay of $ 50 for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted as an inpatient -RRB- . You are also responsible for satisfying the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . If you have further questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Excellent question ! You essentially have 3 main variations on the theme when purchasing ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance ; 1 -RRB- Conventional plan designs with office visit & prescription copays and lower deductibles -LRB- pretty pricey these days -RRB- 2 -RRB- High deductible health insurance plans designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- or a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- - becoming more common . 3 -RRB- Plans that fall in between , here you may see a plan with office visit copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , plans with prescription copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , or plans with more moderate deductible levels with all services subject to the plan 's deductible and co-insurance requirements but that also do n't meet the IRS requirements for being an HSA eligible plan . Simple , right ? First , determine if the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use are in-network providers for the plan you are interested in . Second , review you health and your history of health care consumption . Your needs and usage at 27 will probably be much different than when you are 47 . Try to pick a plan that you believe will meet your needs in the coming year at the best value . Determine if the plan you are interested in allows for direct access to specialists or whether it requires you to be referred out by your primary care physician first . Neither approach is bad but you should understand how you are supposed to access care in order to maximize your benefits and minimize your costs . Ask what your coverage is when you are outside of your immediate area . Increasingly you may find that you only have emergency care outside of a plan 's `` service area '' or perhaps no coverage at all . Do you have special needs ? A chronic illness or injury that requires ongoing treatment or expensive prescription medication requires extra homework . For example , some health plan 's pharmacy benefits cover HIV/AIDS medications at the lowest level -LRB- to them , highest for you -RRB- possible . Finally , compare monthly premiums . The lowest monthly cost , while always attractive , many not really be the lowest annual cost for you once you factor in some or all of the issues I have pointed out above . It may be worth another $ 50 a month in premiums to have a prescription copay instead of a deductible of up to $ 6300 to meet before your expensive medication is covered .
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans -LRB- A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N -RRB- . Plans E , H , I and J are no longer available to purchase . In some states , you may be able to buy a Medigap SELECT policy or a High-Deductible Plan F . The SELECT plans requires you to use specific hospitals . The deductible for High-Deductible Plan F is $ 2,140 in 2014 . Plans F , G , and N are widely sold by most Medicare Supplement insurance companies . They are popular with Medicare beneficiaries for various reasons . Plan F covers all Medicare approved charges . You are not responsible for paying any deductibles , co-pays or excess charges . Plan G is covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 . You have all the same benefits of Plan F after meeting the small deductible . Plan N covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 . You also have co-pays that are never more than $ 20 to any doctor/specialist who accepts Medicare . If you have more questions about Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
Medicare will pay for blood work that is done to diagnose or monitor a health condition . Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for blood work done for preventative reasons or as part of an annual physical . If the blood work is done in the hospital , Part A pays for the blood work . If the testing is done on an outpatient basis , the blood work is paid for by Part B.
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Medicare supplement plans are standardized by the federal government . The only difference between Plan F with one company and Plan F with another is the monthly premiums you pay . So , when shopping make sure you are not over paying for the exact same benefits . Most people like Plan F because it covers the 20 % Medicare approved treatment does n't , with NO co-pays or deductibles . If you are looking to save money and still have great coverage then Plan G is great , because the savings more than offsets the small annual deductible it does n't cover , usually . The best plan is based on your situation , but with a little information , and knowledge the choices become pretty easy . Especially , if you work with an agent who works with all the companies for your area .
Health insurance plans may have several deductibles . The most common deductible is your major medical deductible . Some plans also have a prescription drug deductible . The deductible is an amount you must pay before the health insurance carrier pays their portion of the claim . If you have a $ 300 Rx deductible , you must pay the first $ 300 of your annual prescription drug costs before the insurance carrier pays anything toward the cost of your medications .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
How does health insurance work while on disability ? Since I just ended 12 months of disability that included many hospitalizations and treatments , I can tell you it works exactly the same as not being disabled . Disability insurance protects your income , health insurance protects your health . You can have both going on at once . Depending on your employment situation , how your health insurance is paid for may make a difference . Maybe your employer continues to pick it up , maybe it 's covered under workman 's comp , maybe you pay your own premiums . . the main thing is health insurance does n't go away if you 're collecting disability insurance .
There are a number of methods used to determine how much life insurance is needed . The simplest method is to multiply a person 's annual income by 10 . Another method is to determine how much income would be needed in the event of the insured 's death in order to maintain the lifestyle of the surviving immediate family including school tuition , etc. . Then based on a percentage of annual gain you feel you can count on by investing , determine the amount needed to invest in order to achieve that needed annual income , minus current liquid assets , and that 's the amount of insurance needed .
1 . Is there an annual deductible ? 2 . What is the maximum annual out of pocket costs ? 3 . What does it cost to see a doctor ? 4 . What is the cost of lab work and x-rays ? 5 . What is the cost of outpatient surgery ? 6 . What is the cost of a hospital stay ? 7 . What are the wellness benefits ? 8 . What do prescription drugs cost ? The most important question to ask with respect to buying health insurance now is are my doctors in the network ?
Medicare does indeed have a deductible . Medicare Part A , the hospital portion , in 2013 the Part A deductible is $ 1184 per benefit period to use Medicare jargon . In essence it is a per hospital admission deductible . Medicare Part B has an annual deductible of $ 147 in 2013 . After you satisfy the deductible Medicare pays 80 % you pay the remaining 20 % .
Your health insurance deductible is the amount that the covered individual must pay out of their own pocket before the health insurance plan begins paying for covered health care expenses . Deductibles can vary from one insurance policy to another . As an example , let 's say you have a health insurance policy with a $ 2000 deductible followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that amount.You are thenhospitalized for heart surgery under this policy and the total bill is $ 50,000 . You would be 100 % financially responsible for the first $ 2000 of that bill -LRB- your deductible -RRB- and the health insurance carrier would pay the remaining $ 48,000 . You have `` met '' your deductible by incurring expenses in excess of your plan 's deductible . As many healthcare providers and hospitals will tell you , there is a difference in someone `` meeting '' their deductible and actually paying their deductible expenses . So , inour example , as long as the policy holder keeps paying their health insurance premiums their health insurance will remain in effect even if the policy holder pays none or only a portion of their $ 2000 deductible amount . This is why a growing number of consumers are receiving demands for upfront payment of their deductible and co-insurance cost sharing amounts from some healthcare providers before they will provide services . I just had a friend ask me about this very situation for one of her coworkers who had recently learned she was pregnant and who was told by their OB/GYN that they wanted payment for the person 's $ 1500 deductible and their 30 % co-insurance cost sharing for the OB/GYN to provide their services to that person .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Who Sells Individual Short Term Disability Insurance ?
A licensed broker or agent , who holds a health license can sell Individual Short Term Disability Insurance . When you look at purchasing Disability Insurance be sure you understand how the company defines `` own '' occupation . There is a difference which can make the difference on your ability to work or not . Be sure to understand the provisions on partial disability as well .
There are very few companies that sell individual short term disability insurance . Most short term disability insurance is sold and purchased on a group basis . Contact a DI broker such as myself or others on this website to see what individual disability insurance policies might be available to you .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
There are very few companies that sell individual short term disability insurance . You can contact an agency that sells Mutual of Omaha or Assurity Disability coverage to purchase a short term disability policy . A brokerage that sells Disability Insurance would most likely carry these and any other options , if there are any .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Short Term Disability Insurance is usually provided through one 's place of employment . There are only a few companies that sell individually owned short term life insurance policies . You can purchase short term disability insurance through Life or Disability Insurance brokers who offer a whole range of disability insurance products .
The general answer to your question is `` Yes . '' Though the renewal policy varies from insurance carrier to insurance carrier and may also be impacted by insurance department requirements in your state . Most short term medical policies can be renewed at least once and with some carriers and in some states perhaps up to three times . As a consequence of rising health insurance rates for ObamaCare compliant individual major medical policies for persons who qualify for little or no premium subsidies in the government health insurance marketplaces the interest in Short Term Major Medical plans has increased significantly . Insurance carriers have been modifying their Short Term Medical policies to take advantage of this opportunity and so there are many more options being made available and being offered for longer terms -LRB- some up to 11 months -RRB- than has historically been the case in this product segment . Short Term Major Medical insurance can be an affordable option for individuals who can pass relatively simple underwriting screening and who have no pre-existing condition concerns . A person considering this option should seek the services of an insurance broker who represents multiple carriers and who can help you find the policy best suited to your needs . You should also be aware that a Short Term Major Medical Plan does not qualify as minimum essential coverage under the terms of the Affordable Care Act and that you will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 95 or 1 % of your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- on your 2014 taxes . However , this penalty can only be recovered from a tax refund and the premium savings may far outweigh any potential tax penalty some individuals might be faced with .
Mutual of Omaha offers individual short term disability insurance . You may also be able to obtain individual short term disability insurance from Assurity Life . There is a very limited number of companies that sell this type of policy . Most people are relegated to getting short term disability insurance through their employers .
Yes , you can buy short term disability insurance . There are less than a handful of companies that sell it as an individual policy , that I know of . It is much easier to get short term disability insurance through a group . On the other hand , it is not difficult to find individual long term disability coverage , and most people can buy long term disability insurance at a reasonable price .
You can get Short Term Disability insurance from agencies that sell Disability Insurance , and who carry Disability products from Assurity Life Insurance Company and Mutual of Omaha Insurance Company . These companies offer the purchase of private , Short Term Disability policies . Other than that , you could get Short Term Disability coverage from your place of work , if they offer it as a group benefit .
There are very few companies that sell individual short term disability insurance . Most short term disability insurance is sold and purchased on a group basis . Contact a DI broker such as myself or others on this website to see what individual disability insurance policies might be available to you .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
To purchase short term disability insurance online , you must find an insurance agency that sells products from Assurity and/or Mutual of Omaha . Those are the only two companies that I am aware of that sell individual short term disability policies . You can not buy from the companies directly , so get in touch with a website or local agency where someone can assist you with the purchase .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Short term disability insurance is paycheck protection in case of a disability event . And many consumers can only afford short term disability versus long term disability coverage . Mutual of Omaha is a major carrier in short term disability insurance . Keep in mind that you may have short term disability insurance through your employers group benefit plan . You also have Social Security disability insurance , although benefits may be limited .
No , AARP does not offer short term disability insurance , nor does it offer long term disability insurance . The best place to get short term disability insurance is through your employer , if your workplace offers it . Otherwise , there are a couple of companies that sell it to private individuals . Please contact me if you would like personal assistance .
You can obtain Short Term Disability Insurance in the same way that you can purchase Long Term Disability Insurance . Contact an agent or website that sells it and inquire about options and pricing . Even if a website does not advertise Disability Insurance , if it sells Life Insurance there is a good chance it sells Disability Insurance , as well .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Artificial Insemination ?
The Affordable Care Act does not specifically address , nor does it require , artificial insemination . Therefore , you 'll have to check policy-by-policy to see if a carrier will cover artificial insemination in your state . Best bet is to work with an agent as he/she may know the answer offhand , or will certainly be able to get an answer quickly and come back to you with available choices .
There are twelve states have insurance mandates that either require that health insurance companies cover infertility treatments , or require that the insurer offer at least one plan that covers infertility . Most of these mandates apply to group policies , rather than those issued to individuals . Since the mandate applies to group plans , the first avenue to look at is the employer plans for both spouses . Group plans must comply with the insurance laws in the state where the policy was issued - most frequently that is the headquarters state of the employer . The states with mandates just happen to be those with the largest number of large national employers -LRB- California , Connecticut , Illinois , Massachusetts , New Jersey , New York -RRB- . If one or both employers is headquartered in one of those states , your odds are better .
The Affordable Care Act does not specifically address , nor does it require , artificial insemination . Therefore , you 'll have to check policy-by-policy to see if a carrier will cover artificial insemination in your state . Best bet is to work with an agent as he/she may know the answer offhand , or will certainly be able to get an answer quickly and come back to you with available choices .
Most health insurance plans will not cover artificial insemination , or any other infertility treatment . These procedures are considered elective . Sixteen states have mandates requiring plans to cover certain infertility treatments . Each state law is different . The laws primarily apply to group health plans issued in the state . If your employer is headquartered in a mandate state that includes artificial insemination , there is a possibility AI is covered .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Medicare does in fact limit the number of chiropractic visits . You can only go while you are alive . Once you expire , so do your chiropractic visits . As long as your chiropractor meets Medicare guidelines for licensure , etc there are no artificial limits on care . A doctor gave a man 6 months to live . He could n't pay his bill , so the doctor gave him another 6 months . Ba-da-bing
Most homeowners policies specifically exclude damages that are the result of artificially generated electrical currents . The do cover lightning which is a natural electrical current . Most specifically exclude damage to electronic components .
Life insurance is personal property . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is an artificial entity . It is sometimes in the best interest of planning for a life insurance policy to be owner by a third party or a trust . When an ILIT is set up and dated , the trust of the ILIT applies for the life insurance policy as policy owner . The grantor of the ILIT contributes premiums , generally through annual gifting or using the unified credit . When the death of the insured occurs the proceeds are distributed to the beneficiaries of the ILIT .
Non-qualified tax deferred annuities accumulate tax deferred and when distributions are generated the gain in the contract is taxable as ordinary income tax at the effective tax bracket rate of the annuity owner . If the annuity is owned by an artificial entity and not a person the deferral aspect is forfeit and the gain is taxed annually .
The good news is , Medicare is neither an HMO or PPO . You are free to use any doctor , hospital , lab , etc anywhere in the country . There are no networks , no artificial boundaries . Providers that accept assignment may not bill for excess charges . Pair original Medicare with Medigap plan F and you never have to worry about budgeting .
Assuming this question is addressing literally means companies purchasing annuities , there are a couple of talking points here . If a company owes an annuity , i.e. an artificial entity , they may be purchasing it for the interest rate , which is generally higher than bank CDs or possibly for their retirement accounts .
A trained , professional paramedical examiner performs the exam in your home or office . This routine exam will include taking information about your medical history , height , weight , collecting a urine specimen for urinalysis , blood pressure , pulse and collecting a blood sample . The exam will take about 45 minutes or less . If additional testing is required by the insurance company such as an electrocardiogram -LRB- ECG -RRB- or a chest xray , you will be notified in advance . We recommend scheduling the appointment at the least stressful time of day for you . Blood pressure can be artificially raised by stress . It can also be raised by caffeine , tobacco and alcohol so avoid these for several hours prior . Limit salt intake and rich foods for 24 hours prior to the exam . Fasting for 4-8 hours prior to the exam is also advised -LRB- and may be required -RRB- but drink plenty of water . Finally , avoid strenuous physical activities for 24 hours prior to the exam .
Assume you mean a life insurance paramedical exam rather than a physical performed by a doctor -LRB- not common -RRB- . A trained , professional paramedical examiner performs the exam in your home or office . This routine exam will include taking information about your medical history , height , weight , collecting a urine specimen for urinalysis , blood pressure , pulse and collecting a blood sample . The exam will take about 45 minutes or less . If additional testing is required by the insurance company such as an electrocardiogram -LRB- ECG -RRB- or a chest xray , you will be notified in advance . We recommend scheduling the appointment at the least stressful time of day for you . Blood pressure can be artificially raised by stress . It can also be raised by caffeine , tobacco and alcohol so avoid these for several hours prior . Limit salt intake and rich foods for 24 hours prior to the exam . Fasting for 4-8 hours prior to the exam is also advised -LRB- and may be required -RRB- but drink plenty of water . Finally , avoid strenuous physical activities for 24 hours prior to the exam .
Here is the list that I keep on file for my clients : >> Fast for a minimum of 8 Hours Prior to Exam unless you are diabetic or have another health condition . If you do have a health condition we will discuss specific instructions for your case . >> Insist on Morning appointments only ! Blood pressure and exam results tend to be better in the morning . Many examiners are available on Saturdays as well . >> If you are sick on the day of your exam , cancel . We can always reschedule the exam when you are better . >> Take your medications as you normally would . >> Avoid alcohol for a minimum of 24 hours prior to your exam . Blood pressure , liver enzymes and more may be elevated otherwise . >> If you smoke , do not smoke prior to your exam . Smoking raises blood pressure . For cigar smokers and other tobacco users Some of the companies will give you a non-smoker rate but your urine sample needs to be negative for nicotine . Please call to discuss your case >> Your weight Check your weight in the days leading up to your exam . On the day of your exam , take your shoes off , dont wear belts , empty your pockets , wear light clothing . IMORTANT Make sure you ask the examiner what your weight is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to weigh you again . >> Your height Stand up straight just like Mom told you to . IMPORTANT Ask the examiner what your height is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to check again . >> Avoid Caffeine on Exam day Caffeine elevates your blood pressure . Avoid it for at least a few hours prior to exam . >> Cholesterol TIP Eat plenty of oatmeal and bananas in the week leading up to your exam and lay off the sweets and other cholesterol elevating foods . >> Exercise TIP If you exercise , do NOT exercise on the morning of your exam . Exercise may artificially raise your blood pressure . >> Water Drink lots of water to flush out your system leading up to the exam .
In general , Medicare does not set artificial limits for treatment on an annual or lifetime basis . So in theory , you will not `` run out of Medicare benefits '' . Medicare does require pre-certification for some items such as DME and may only authorize coverage in 90 day increments . Check with your doctor for full details .
No one knows the answer to that . But interest rates generally have cycles . Presently the government is artificially suppressing interest rates , but it seems reasonable that rates must rise eventually . Many financial planners are locking down interest rate periods of five years or less which may be an indication of their belief that interest rates will rise within the decade .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What exactly is flexible premium survivorship adjustable life insurance ?
This is more commonly known as a survivorship universal life -LRB- SUL -RRB- insurance policy - it 's different from an individual universal life insurance policy in that the policy insures the lives of two people -LRB- usually a husband and wife -RRB- . The policy proceeds are only paid out upon the death of the second insured . Many people use this type of policy for estate planning purposes . If your mother can not continue to make premium payments or does not want to , she can surrender the policy and take out the cash value -LRB- less any surrender charges , outstanding loans , or interest , if applicable -RRB- . There is also the option to let it run out on it 's own . When you no longer contribute premiums to the policy , it will steadily use up the cash value in the policy to continue the coverage until there is nothing left , at which the point the policy would `` crash '' on it 's own and no longer provide coverage . The third option is to change the structure of the policy . You may have the option to reduce the face amount of the policy -LRB- the death benefit -RRB- or reduce the length of coverage to lower the premiums to make the policy more affordable if cost is a concern . I would suggest your mother contact the agent on the policy and ask them to run midstreams to find out what the current values are on the policy , how long the coverage will go for on the guaranteed side and current assumption side of the program and what changes would it make to the policy given the above options . This will provide a good indication as to what course of action would be most appropriate . Guaranteed side means how long will the coverage be guaranteed for at the absolute minimum with a given program structure . Current assumption side means how long will the coverage go for given today 's values .
In addition to Jason 's excellent advice to meet with the selling agent to find out the detailed workings of the policy , another option is for your mother 's children to continue to pay the premiums assuming that they are listed as the beneficiaries . The policy might be an excellent buy and worth keeping until your mother passes . And if you ca n't afford to keep all of that policy in-force , reducing coverage or selling part of the policy to an investor for cash -LRB- called `` life settlement '' -RRB- is also a viable option worth looking into . Survivorship policies that are designed to pay only after the 2nd spouse has passed are usually sold in high amounts and thus are very expensive . You should definitely educate yourself on what your mother owns and come to know every option open to your family before letting that policy lapse .
It depends on the insurer as to what Adjustable Life is . There were a couple of midwestern companies who had products with that moniker which were fixed premium adjustable life insurance products . Universal Life one of the dominant forms of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life which is the official name of the product . So , it may be that you are asking about Universal Life . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
Universal Life is a form of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life . This is the official name of this type of product . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
There are two basic types of life insurance : term and permanent . Term is for temporary needs and covers a specific length of time - typically up to 30 years . Permanent or cash value life insurance is designed to last for a lifetime and , provided the required premiums are paid , can not be outlived . Permanent policies comes in different forms such as whole life or universal life . Whole life features fixed premiums that must be paid until maturity , often age 100 . Universal Life is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life - this is the official name of this type of product . It describes in a simple way how the product works . Premiums are flexible because that can be adjusted upward or downward . You can also skip premiums . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly.Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policyowners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Permanent policies have variations with features and flexibility for a wide range of planning situations . Consult with a life insurance professional to design the best plan to meet your specific needs .
Universal Life is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life - this is the official name of this type of product . It describes in a simple way how the product works . Premiums are flexible because that can be adjusted upward or downward . You can also skip premiums . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policyowners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate .
A joint life insurance policy -LRB- also called a survivorship policy or second-to-die policy -RRB- is coverage on two lives . This is often used in estate planning when a policy will cover both the husband and the wife . At the death of the second person , the death benefit is paid to the heirs . The cost for the policy can be significantly less , because the insurance company knows that with a survivorship policy , the death benefit will most likely pay off years later than a non-survivorship policy . Another advantage of survivorship policies is that one person can be uninsurable . Some survivorship policies offer a first-to-die rider which pays out a portion of the death benefit at the first death .
All Universal Life Insurance is flexible premium universal life insurance . That is one of the features of universal life , that you can adjust the premium up or down at will . You must be careful when you adjust the premium , though , because that will affect the policy in other ways . E.g. . If you increase the premium , your policy may last longer or have more cash value . If you decrease the premium , the opposite can occur . By having the flexibility to change the premium , you can possibly have a policy that you can adjust and use for your entire life .
Flexible premium adjustable life is the more antiquated title of universal life . Today , there are four different universal life polices. : current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . These three is feature the flexibility or adjust-ability of premiums and death benefit amounts . Guaranteed universal life , in general terms , does not have this flexible feature based on it 's secondary guarantees .
What is flexible adjustible life ? Another name for universal life . Have n't really heard it in a while but I am sure some companies use that name for universal life , to be different . A universal life policy is flexible as you can choose to pay your premium or not . It is adjustible because you can lower the face amount , change the contribution levels and a few other things . This makes for a really flexible product , which actually has meant more troubles for insured than good old fashion pay your premium each month policies , which chug along .
Adjustable life insurance : allows you to adjust the amount of premium you pay and the frequency or length of time you pay it ; enables you to dump in lump sums of premium or take out policy loans ; allows for the adjustment of face amount to suit your needs at any particular time in your life ; and is able to be set up to last a short period of time or for your whole life . Adjustable life insurance , or flexible premium adjustable life insurance , combines features of Term and Whole life . It is most commonly sold as Universal Life Insurance .
The marital deduction act was the basis for creating joint life insurance or survivorship insurance . The marital deduction act allowed married couples to pass assets between them at the death of the first spouse . Survivorship was created to pay the federal estate tax at the second death of a married couple , coinciding with the marital deduction act . Survivorship policies have several actuarial formats like participating whole life , variable universal life , indexed universal life , current assumptions universal life .
A Joint Life Insurance Policy is known by a few names : survivorship , second to die and my personal favorite last one out -LRB- just kidding . -RRB- Survivorship was originally conceived to correlate with the Marital Deduction Act in the eighties when the law allowed the state to pass between spouses at the first death tax free , i.e. taxes then are due at the second death of a married couple . The economic leverage of survivorship is significant and can address several inheritance strategies like estate taxes , charitable giving and making a difference for your children , grandchildren and maybe your great grandchildren as our societys life expectancy appear to be heading for age 100 .
Joint life insurance is usually referring to joint second-to-die which is also known as survivorship life insurance . These policies insure two lives and became popular with the advent of the unlimited martial deduction in the early 1980s . It has become a common way to provide for estate liquidity . Priced at a lower premium than two single life policies , survivorship policies pay nothing at the first death . The policy death benefit pays at the death of the second insured to die . While readily available at one time , joint first-to-die life insurance policies are no longer available from A rated carriers that distribute through life insurance brokers .
There are three basic planning goals for life insurance : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification At minimum , seniors have final expense liabilities that they generally dont desire to pass on to their children . Covering those expenses with a final expense life insurance product is a great alternative with a company that offers benevolent geriatric underwriting . Life insurance underwriting is extremely important as you become older , especially if you need more coverage than final expense . A good life insurance company that has sizable retention and death benefit break points can really help keep the price tag down . Retention is the risk the life insurance company is willing to take on without sharing the risk with other life insurance companies . The bigger the retention , the more wiggle room to negotiate the underwriting offer . And death benefit break points can reduce the cost of insurance as you buy more coverage . Break points generally start at $ 250,000 , then $ 500,000 , $ 1,000,000 and $ 3,000,000 . Guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice . Income Life insurance has the potential to generate tax advantaged income and , if properly designed , may generate tax free income as long as the policy is issued as a non-modified endowment contract and is kept in force for the life of the insured . Some seniors use life insurance tax free income in tandem with their Social Security benefits and defer their qualified plan distributions until age 70 . Its a good planning strategy . Life insurance policies with the least expense loads are the most desirable . Indexed universal life may be the best policy choice . Inheritance Many seniors desire to make a difference with their children , grandchildren and charities . A survivorship policy for married couples is the best solution because in leverages two lives on one contract and pays the death claim at the death of the second insured . Survivorship guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice for married couples and guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice for single seniors . We spreadsheet the life insurance companies based on underwriting , product provisions and price , assisting seniors in the decision making process .
Generally , when people ask about joint life insurance they are asking about joint second-to-die aka survivorship life insurance . These policies insure two lives and became popular with the advent of the unlimited martial deduction for estate planning in the early 1980s . For a lower premium survivorship policies pay nothing at the first death . The policy death benefit pays at the death of the second insured to die . While readily available at one time , joint first-to-die life insurance policies are no longer available from A rated carriers that distribute through life insurance brokers .
Flexible premium adjustable life insurance is another name for Universal Life . The premium is flexible in that you can increase or decrease it as desired . If you increase it , the policy can last longer and/or build up more cash value . If you decrease it , the policy could lapse sooner and/or build up less cash value . It is adjustable in that you can lower the face amount or premium as desired , or dump in a lump sum of money to grow tax deferred .
A joint survivorship life insurance policy is a pretty ingenious creation . The idea is to have two insureds on one policy . Whats so good about that ? From an insurance companys point of view , they dont have to pay the benefit until the second insured dies . This can give them more years to collect and invest premium , than they would have with only one insured . Can you imagine if one of the insureds was much younger than the other say with an older gentleman and his younger new bride ? Decades could pass before a claim will be made . From the insureds point of view , blended underwriting can work very much to their joint advantage . Take the example above . The husband may unfortunately be older , and in ill health . He may be uninsurable , or eligible at a very high rate . However , his younger wife may qualify for the lowest rates available . The premium they would have to pay jointly could be very reasonable . Not only that : the husband may get coverage whereas on his own , that would be impossible . You can see that joint survivorship life insurance can be a very affordable way to cover needs such as estate preservation , and making charitable bequests .
The only thing that separates this from other policies is the word survivorship . What this means is that the policy covers at least 2 individuals and it only pays a benefit with the last one dies . Survivorship policies are usually smaller face amount policies taken out by couples with larger estates . The reason they do this is to use the death benefit to cover or offset estate taxes for their heirs . I have personally not seen one done with a universal life policy . Reason being is the cost . In a majority of cases , it would probably be more cost-effective to use a traditional whole life policy for this purpose .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Do I Get Medicare Part A And B ?
To get Medicare Part A and B , most people have paid into Medicare through taxes for at least 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- over the course of their working lives . They are either automatically enrolled on their 65th birthday , if they are receiving Social Security at that time . Or they enroll themselves in the 3 months before or after their 65th birthday . Others get Medicare Part A and B for being disabled for 2 years or having end stage renal disease or ALS .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- help seniors cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - a Medigap plan can pay all or a portion of the other 20 % , depending on which plan you have . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- with a Medigap plan will help you limit your out-of-pocket expenses and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Original Medicare will also accept your Medigap plan . There are 10 different Medigap plans and they are all standardized - meaning each plan type is exactly the same from every insurance company regardless of who you have your coverage through -LRB- the only difference being the price you pay for your Medigap plan -RRB- . The 10 Medigap plans are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . The benefits that can be secured under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal government-run health insurance program for individuals age 65 and older -LRB- and those on disability or have end-stage renal disease who are under age 65 -RRB- . It 's made up of 4 parts : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A - this is your hospital insurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B - this is your physician insurance 3 -RRB- Medicare Part C - also known as Medicare Advantage . This coverage is sold by private insurance companies and provides benefits equal to or greater than those provided by Medicare Part A and Part B . Some carriers offer prescription drug coverage with a Medicare Advantage plan 4 -RRB- Medicare Part D - this is your stand-alone prescription drug plan . This is also sold by private insurance companies and can be used with Medicare Parts A & B . Many individuals add a Medicare supplement plan to their Part A & B coverage to cover expenses Medicare does n't cover .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
The only time I am aware that Medicare is secondary is when you are covered under and employer group health plan if there are more than 20 full time employees . I always advise people in that situation to take out the Part A of Medicare and delay getting both Part B and Part D until you retire or come off your employer 's group health plan . You do not need Part B or Part D as long as you are covered under an employer plan . The Part B premium this year for new people enrolling in Medicare is $ 121.80 and you do n't need Part B if you are covered by your employer since the employer coverage is primary . You can go ahead and enroll in Part A of Medicare because it is free .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Borrow Money From My Whole Life Insurance Policy ?
Assuming you have accumulated cash values , the answer is yes . But there are strategies to access cash values . Dividends , which are classified as a return of unused premium , can be taken out free up to basis . Policy loans of gain is the another cash value option to consider . Most participating whole life insurance companies charge some form of interest spread on their policy loans . A few use the more expensive direct recognition policy loans . Before accessing your cash values , order an in force ledger to determine the status of your policy and an illustrated in force ledger displaying your dividend withdrawal or policy loan .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 714 422 9616 . garylane@cox.net .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
You can borrow from whole life , universal life , indexed universal life , and variable universal life policies . These are the types of policy that can accumulate cash - basically all policy types except term life insurance . It is an easy process - just call up the insurance company and ask them to send you a check or wire the money . To borrow money from your policy , you must have sufficient money in your cash surrender account and be sure not to borrow too much or the policy may lapse .
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can take money out of a whole life insurance policy by borrowing or surrendering it . If you borrow money from your whole life insurance policy , you can still keep your death benefit intact if you pay back the money with interest over time . if you surrender the cash value , you lose the death benefit from your policy , as well .
Borrowing against a 401k is both a yes and no answer as to debt . No it is not traditional debt as showing against your credit score or debt to earnings ratio , because you are borrowing your own money . It is debt as Jim mentioned , because it must be repaid within 9 months . The tax and penalty consequences are much worse than borrowing the money from a lender . It is never advised to borrow from your 401k because you are borrowing from your own future . A simple rule is if you need money today while you are able to earn an income , you will need money when you are old and sick and ca n't earn an income .
That is a great question ! The only things that you need to have in order to borrow from your Globe Life -LRB- or any company 's life insurance policy -RRB- are these : First , that you are the owner of the policy . If Your parents bought it for you when you were young , and they are still the owners , you will not be able to borrow from it . They can , but you ca n't . You must be the owner of the policy . Second , it must be a whole life policy , as term policies have no cash value ; And third , that there is an adequate cash reserve to borrow from . If the policy is fairly new , there may not be much to borrow from , or if there has already been a loan taken , you may not be able to take more cash out , without tanking the policy . My advice would be to contact your agent , or Globe themselves , -LRB- have your policy number handy -RRB- and ask them if you are good to borrow . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Well as there is a cash value accumulation to your Life Insurance policy . You may borrow as cash interests is compounded . Depending on your company rates are usually higher or lower than others . You may borrow from a Universal Life Policy , Whole Life Policy , Modified Endowment which is like a security policy that gains interest and is tax free . Its best to let the money accumulate and money borrowed from any life policy will be deducted from benefits to beneficiary if unpaid .
First of all , cash value life insurance is a bundled product and a bad investment . You should always separate your life insurance from any savings or investing that you are doing . Remember , life insurance is only there to protect your assets , pay off any remaining debt , and replace an income for your spouse . With this said , borrowing from a cash value policy means that you are borrowing from yourself and paying interest on the money that is saved in the policy . At the same time , your death benefit will decrease dollar for dollar by the money that you borrowed from your cash value . Now , you are paying the same premium for less insurance . Therefore , the benefits derived from borrowing from a life insurance policy will only be on the side of the insurance company .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Is Renters Liability Insurance ?
If you are referring to a commercial risk , such as a store or garage , then your commercial agent is the person to ask . If you are referring to a rental unit in which you live , then the answer is that liability insurance is a part of a tenants -LRB- renters -RRB- policy . The policy also contains property coverage for your personal property and that coverage is the main determinant of the premium . In my area these policies are available for $ 10-15 per month . Of course each policy is individually written and the price can vary a great deal .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
You may be required to purchase Renters Insurance . It depends if this is a requirement in your rental agreement or lease agreement . Some properties do require renters insurance to cover their interest . Renters Insurance also covers general liability and most leasing agency 's require a minimum of $ 100,000 in liability insurance . They do not care how much personal property you insure as long as the liability insurance is there . These policy 's can be very inexpensive especially for example if you buy the minimum policy $ 5.000 in personal property is usually the lowest you can buy , and $ 100,000 in liability for around $ 10.00 per month
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
When renting a home , the home owner needs to have Landlords Insurance to provide coverage for the Dwelling and Premises Liability . The renter needs to buy Renters Insurance to provide coverage for Personal Property & Family Liability . Although both the Landlords policy and the Renters policy are not required by law , it is advisable to be covered in the event of a claim . Many large property management companies and property owners do require tenants to purchase Renters Insurance as a condition to the Rental Agreement ; the reason for this is to avoid lengthy and cumbersome legal issues in the event of a claim attributable to negligence . For a small premium the Renters Insurance provides the tenant with Family Liability coverage which will offer defense and payout damages up to the policy limit . Liability coverage will offer protection for negligence that may lead to a claim -LRB- i.e. accidental fire , smoke , water damage etc. . . -RRB-
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Rates for renters insurance depend upon a few factors . Where your apartment is located , how much personal property you are insuring and what liability rates you requested . For example , in Michigan , where I live I can get renters insurance covering $ 30,000 of personal property with $ 300,000 in liability coverage for about $ 200/year . The point is renters insurance is very affordable . I hope this helps .
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
You will find renters insurance to be very inexpensive . With most companies renter insurance covering approximately $ 5,000 to $ 10,000 in personal contents and $ 300,000 in personal liability to be approximately $ 150 to $ 300 dollars a year which is equivalent to about $ 12.50 to $ 25 dollars a month . Depending on the carrier this could vary . By writing a renters policy not only are you getting coverage for your personal belongings but you are also getting personal liability coverage . Some companies also include additional coverage such as host liquor liability , which you would need to rent halls for events like a wedding or a birthday . You may also be able to schedule things such as your cell phone which may or may not be cheaper then purchasing the coverage from your cell phone carrier . You will find that if you purchase your renters policy through the same carrier as your auto insurance that the discount you receive on your auto insurance will more than pay for your renters policy . Multi-policy discounts with some companies can range from 5 % -20 % or possibly more , which can save you hundreds on your auto insurance . So be sure to talk to your insurance agent about writing a renters policy and what discounts are available .
The best way to think about it is , to imagine that your unit has been gutted by a fire . You have lost everything that you own . How much money will you want ? If you take pictures of your unit you will know what you had . If you estimated the replacement cost for each item , you would know how much you would want . I suggest that number guide you in selecting a renters policy . If a process server appears at your door with a lawsuit , how much back up do you want ? I suggest you take as much liability coverage as the insurance company offers .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does Medicare Cover For Assisted Living ?
Medicare does not cover Assisted Living at all . Medicare is very limited on its long term care benefits . You can only get assistance if you are hospitalized for three days , not counting day of discharge , and require skilled care . You can only stay in a nursing home for a maximum of 100 days . the first 20 days are covered in full as long as you meet the requirements , day 21 through 100 you will have a copay . You may also quaify from limited rehab services in your home . If you need assisted living you may qualify for certain veterens benefits if you or your spouse served in the military during a period of war . Your only other option is Medicaid . If you have assets see a good elder law attorney or Medicaid planner . It could save you a large portion of your assets and allow you to get help faster .
Medicare is insurance coverage for `` medical care '' and does not cover the costs of assisted living facilities or long-term care facilities -LRB- custodial care -RRB- . Medicare will however cover qualified healthcare costs while a Medicare beneficiary is living at an assisted living facility . Medicare is more often used to pay for a skilled nursing facility or home health care . There are always exceptional circumstances that will allow Medicare to cover different types of care , for example , while in a qualified stay at a skilled nursing facility a Medicare beneficiary may also receive custodial care , but in most cases Medicare wont cover the costs of `` custodial care . '' In some states , Medicaid will pay for some of the costs associated with assisted livingif a qualified beneficiary has a limited income . Medicaid is designed to help seniors and some individuals with disabilities pay for healthcare when they are unable to pay for it themselves . Check on qualification requirements and available waiver programs for assisted living with your state Medicaid department . Individuals should seek out an extended care insurance specialist to understand options and formulate a plan to financially address assisted living or long term care needs before any such care may be needed . Jeffrey J. VanCleve 800-211-0017
Medicare does not cover assisted living costs in New Mexico , as it does not cover the cost of assisted living in any of the 50 United States . Medicare Part A will continue to cover hospitalization and other expenses that it covered before moving to assisted living , as will Part B , Part D , etc. . But the residential costs , food , custodial care , etc will not be covered by Medicare .
No , Medicare Part B does not cover the residential cost of assisted living . Once you enter an assisted living residence , your Medicare Part B will still cover what it did before : medical equipment , outpatient doctor visits , etc. . But , unfortunately , neither Medicare Part A or B will cover the costs of living in an assisted living facility .
You wont be able to use Medicare to pay for rent , meals , or anything non-medical related at an assisted living facility . Assisted living facilities are considered to be non-medical senior housing . If you live at an assisted living facility , you can continue to use your Medicare coverage for medical needs covered under Part A and Part B . Some people purchase long-term care insurance policies to help with the cost of an assisted living facility . You can also check with your local Medicaid office to see if you qualify for assistance . Medicaid is highly needs-based and the duration of stay at a facility is limited .
Medicare does cover Home Health Care , BUT only if : its ordered by a Medicare approved physician AND the person in incapable of leaving the home AND services are rendered by a Medicare approved provider AND the person requires more than just assistance with activities of daily living -LRB- eating , bathing , dressing , toileting , functional mobility -RRB- . Medicare will not pay for services performed by immediate relatives or members of a patients household . Medicare does not pay for Assisted Living or Adult Day Care . If these conditions are met , Medicare will generally cover medical services in the home as ordered by a Medicare approved physician .
Medicare only pays for skilled care for a limited time following a hospitalization for the same condition that caused the need for skilled care . In other words , Medicare does not pay for assisted living costs -LRB- except for medications , doctor appointments , and other Medicare approved expenses that it would approve no matter where you lived -RRB- . Most Long Term Care Insurance policies now cover assisted living . So purchasing LTCI can not only save you money , but can provide freedom in choosing your place of residence when you are unable to live independently .
Medicare is not intended to help pay for assisted living . Medicare part A covers hospitalization , part B covers doctors services and medical supplies , and part D covers prescription drugs . Approved medical procedures delivered in an assisted living setting may be covered by Medicaid . However the cost of support for your activities of daily living would not be covered . Medicaid provides this coverage , but only after assets are spent down to under $ 2,000 .
Most of the medical care related to Alzheimer 's disease is covered by Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- or Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital insurance -RRB- . If you have Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , your policy may help cover the co-insurance and deductibles associated with Original Medicare Part A and B . You can contact your insurance company or an insurance agent who specializes in Medicare Supplements to review your Medigap benefits . As for medications , a Part D prescription plan will cover most Alzheimers medications . Your costs -LRB- co-pays and deductibles -RRB- will depend on your plan . Unfortunately , long-term custodial care costs -LRB- nursing home , assisted living , or adult day care -RRB- are not covered by Medicare . Even hiring home help for bathing , toileting and dressing -LRB- custodial care -RRB- is not covered by Medicare unless the Medicare Beneficiary is receiving skilled-nursing care , physical or occupational therapy to assist with the recovery from an illness or injury . If I can be of further assistance , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Nope . Long-term care insurance provides financial protection against the cost of having assistance with your daily life . For example , someone living in an assisted living facility or a nursing home has long-term care that is needed because without the assistance of others , they would not be able to live comfortably and would face difficulty getting around and taking care of themselves . Long-term care is typically most utilized by elder and retired persons . Long-term disability insurance refers to providing an income to you in the event you develop a disability that inhibits your ability to work in your field -LRB- make sure to check the definition of disability in your policy to see what qualifies as a disability - this can vary by company -RRB- . For example , if you 're a surgeon and develop a condition that affects your ability to perform surgery , that condition would affect your ability to earn an income in your field . To protect against the loss of income , a long-term disability policy would provide an income to you while you recover or transition to another occupation - again , this is where the `` definition of disability '' is critical . If you need assistance with your coverage , please feel free to send me an e-mail via the contact me button or give me a call . I 'm happy to help and there are no fees for my assistance . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Medicare does not cover Assisted Living at all . Medicare is very limited on its long term care benefits . You can only get assistance if you are hospitalized for three days , not counting day of discharge , and require skilled care . You can only stay in a nursing home for a maximum of 100 days . the first 20 days are covered in full as long as you meet the requirements , day 21 through 100 you will have a copay . You may also quaify from limited rehab services in your home . If you need assisted living you may qualify for certain veterens benefits if you or your spouse served in the military during a period of war . Your only other option is Medicaid . If you have assets see a good elder law attorney or Medicaid planner . It could save you a large portion of your assets and allow you to get help faster .
Medicare will not pay for Assisted Living because Medicare does not provide Long Term Care . Under Medicare Part A , Medicare will pay up to 100 days in a Skilled Nursing Facility . The whole purpose for Skilled Nursing is to get you better so you can go home . You will need to purchase a Long Term Care Policy to pay for Assisted Living as well as Nursing Home Care .
Not usually . Medical insurance provides coverage for immediate or preventative medical needs . Assisted living is not a medical condition . Long term care insurance is what is used to pay for an assisted living location . Long term care insurance creates a pool of money to pay for the expense of services provided by an assisted living facility .
Medicare does not pay for rent or amenities in privately funded assisted living communities . Considered non-medical senior housing , Medicare will not pay for your rent , meals , or anything not deemed as medical . If you have Medicare , you can still use it for your medical needs . You may be able to receive some covered services at an assisted care facility for preventative or acute care or medical emergency -LRB- therapies , medical supplies , equipment use , dietary counseling and ambulance transportation -RRB- . Thank you for taking the time to read my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Some of the items and services that Medicare does n't cover include : < a title = '' Services that include medical and non-medical care provided to people who are unable to perform basic activities of daily living , like dressing or bathing . Long-term supports and services can be provided at home , in the community , in assisted living , or in nursing homes . Individuals may need long-term supports and services at any age . Medicare and most health insurance plans do n't pay for long-term care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > Long-term care -LRB- also called < a title = '' Non-skilled personal care , like help with activities of daily living like bathing , dressing , eating , getting in or out of a bed or chair , moving around , and using the bathroom . It may also include the kind of health-related care that most people do themselves , like using eye drops . In most cases , Medicare does n't pay for custodial care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > custodial care -RRB- Most dental care Eye examinations related to prescribing glasses Dentures Cosmetic surgery Acupuncture Hearing aids and exams for fitting them Routine foot care You can go to the medicare.gov website and check on the main page if any test , item or service is covered by Medicare .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
No . If you have full Medicaid assistance you no longer need a Medigap Supplement policy . Everything that is not covered by Medicare will be covered by Medicaid . However you should make sure you are on full Medicaid . There are some people who get Medicaid assistance that pays their Medicare Part B Premium and RX assistance but does not pay their Medicare co-pays or deductibles .
Yes , Long Term Care Insurance often covers assisted living . It depends on the wording of the policy . Many Long Term Care policies simply reimburse the person needing the care so they can spend the LTC benefit where they wish . This can be an assisted living residence , or even staying in their own home if they are able to hire someone to assist them with ADL 's .
People purchase long term care insurance because they want to protect their assets , and because they want to be involved in the decisions about what long term care they receive . Having a long term care insurance policy can pay the insured person funds that can be used to pay for a home health aid , personal assistant so they can live in an independent living residence , or monthly charge for assisted living or nursing home . While it gives the person freedom to choose the care they are most comfortable with , it also allows them to hold onto their assets that might have to be spent on long term care , without insurance .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Does IVF Cost With Private Health Insurance ?
IVF -LRB- in vitro fertilization -RRB- is not a covered medical expense with most health insurance plans . Some employer group plans may include IVF benefits and there are a few states that mandate IVF coverage for individual major medical plans . IVF is not a medical necessity which is why it is normally excluded from plan benefits . The few times I have seen IVF benefits they are usually capped around $ 10,000 -LRB- lifetime -RRB- which means any excess charges are the responsibility of the individual .
IVF -LRB- in vitro fertilization -RRB- is not a covered medical expense with most health insurance plans . Some employer group plans may include IVF benefits and there are a few states that mandate IVF coverage for individual major medical plans . IVF is not a medical necessity which is why it is normally excluded from plan benefits . The few times I have seen IVF benefits they are usually capped around $ 10,000 -LRB- lifetime -RRB- which means any excess charges are the responsibility of the individual .
Most health insurance policies will not cover any infertility treatments of any type . Even fewer will cover IVF . Fifteen states have insurance mandates which require certain health plans to cover infertility . Nine of those state mandate include coverage for IVF . Since most of these mandates apply to group plans , the in situs state of the employer is more important than the state where you live . If your employer is headquartered in a state with an IVF mandate , then your odds are better .
Health insurance covers procedures and treatment that is considered medically necessary . IVF is not considered medically necessary and in most cases is not a covered expense . There are exceptions where local regulations mandate coverage for IVF . Check with your state Dept. of Insurance for clarification . Some employer group plans may cover IVF .
Most health insurance programs will not cover the reversal of any voluntary sterilizations . You may have to pay for the procedure out of pocket . The expenses are tax deductible , which may reduce the total net expense . IVF is a frequent alternative to tubal reversal , and is sometimes covered by insurance . Eight states have mandates requiring certain plans to cover IVF expenses . Your other alternative is to purchase a plan with a higher actuarial value -LRB- platinum or gold plan -RRB- . That way more of your pregnancy-related health care will be covered . In addition , you should purchase short term disability to replace income during maternity leave . This needs to start prior to conception .
There are very few health insurance plans that pay for IVF . Most policies will not provide coverage unless required by law . Fifteen states have mandates requiring the certain health plans cover infertility treatments . Of that group only nine specifically require IVF coverage . These mandates apply mostly to group plans issued in the state , so if your employer is headquartered in a mandate state those rules may apply . On the other hand the mandates have loopholes . If you live in a mandate state you may not be guaranteed coverage .
By PGD I assume you are referring to Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis . PGD is genetic testing to determine if an embryo that is to be implanted during IVF -LRB- in vitro fertilization -RRB- has any genetic defects . Most plans do not cover IVF and as such , usually wo n't cover related expenses including PGD .
Most health insurance plans do not cover In Vitro or any other infertility treatment . Most ART procedures are considered elective . Fifteen states have insurance mandates requiring some coverage for infertility . Nine of those state mandates include IVF . All the mandates are full of exceptions and loopholes . If your employer is headquartered in one of those states , your group health plan may be subject to the mandate . Your alternative is to purchase the best possible coverage for a hopeful pregnancy : primary health insurance , short term disability , and hospital indemnity .
In Vitro Fertilization is considered an elective procedure and is not covered by most health insurance plans . Nine states have insurance mandates that require certain plans issued in those states to cover at least one IVF cycle . Each mandate has different criteria for which employer plans and individual plans must comply , the number of cycles covered , and the policyholder eligibility criteria . Check the insurance laws in the headquarter states for your employer to see if a mandate applies .
IVF , otherwise known as In Vitro Fertilization would generally not be something that medicare would pay for . Typically medicare provides coverage for treatment that is considered medically necessary . Without knowing the details of your particular circumstances and medical requirements it is difficult to answer this type of question definitively . I strongly recommend that you contact medicare directly at 800-Medicare to find a definite answer to this question .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
G'day mate , you nearly had me stumped with this question . Lifetime loading is a feature of the Australian health insurance system and not a part of health insurance plans sold in the United States . Down under , if a person over age 30 does not purchase private health insurance they will become subject to a premium penalty -LRB- or loading -RRB- of 2 % for each year they have delayed in purchasing private health insurance . For example , Mr. Dundee waits until he is 35 to buy private health insurance . He has waited 4 years past being age 30 and his monthly premium as a 35 year old will be inflated by 8 % -LRB- 2 % x 4 years -RRB- above what the premium would have been for someone who has had coverage since they age 30 . This legal approach is designed to incentivize Australians to purchase private health insurance .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Medigap is health insurance sold by private insurance companies . Each insurance company has it 's own set of Medigap premiums . These premiums are usually based on the Medicare recipient 's zip code , age and tobacco status . Cost of your premium will also depend on which Medigap Plan benefits you want to buy . The best way to see how much a Medigap Plan will cost is to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . In just a matter of minutes , we can provide you with the insurance companies and premiums available in your area -- and , not just with the insurance carriers you see online . Once you have quotes tailored to your criteria , you 'll know exactly how much Medigap insurance will cost . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
Private split dollar life insurance is a plan that allows for the costs and/or benefits of a life insurance to be split between two private parties . Those participating in private split dollar arrangements are usually family members or their trusts . Often , a second to die life insurance policy is used with a life insurance trust . To find out more about options using private split dollar life insurance , contact a knowledgeable life insurance agent .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
When Do You Pay Auto Insurance ?
In California , in order to issue a policy a payment must be made . You will be given payment options going forward for you to chose from . Anywhere from pay in full to monthly payments . You can also set up for automatic deductions from a credit card or checking account .
Typically , you pay for auto insurance when you purchase the policy . Depending on the effective date , you can pay at a later date . Also , each carrier is different , regarding their billing procedures . If you are already covered , usually a bill is sent 30-60 days in advance of the due date .
In NJ once you purchase vehicle one need to have insurance paper work to show at the DMV . Depending upon your situation that is you are adding the vehicle on your existing policy , or replacing vehicle , inform your Insurance agent who usually gives you some grace period for payment . But one need to inform agent for such changes immediately . Also , it is better to talk to your agent while you are about to make some changes in your Auto , that is sale , purchase or adding another driver , use of vehicle , even type and make of vehicle as agent can good guide for you if certain vehicle can cost you more or less in premium etc. . . Some older version of car with no air-bag , or lights ON features etc can cost more , compare to new models with all added safety features ... . Note : I write answer based on my experiences ... .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover your auto while in the garage . Homeowners insurance covers the home and not autos . Only your auto insurance policy can protect your auto while in the garage . If you have an auto you do not drive and just store in your garage I would recommend purchasing comprehensive coverage only on your auto .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
If you have a personal auto coverage and you rent a car your existing auto policy will cover you in the rental car , but if you have an accident you will have to pay your normal deductible . The rental car companies make a LOT of money from selling really overpriced insurance and in general it 's a good idea to just say no as long as you do have a personal auto policy . If you do n't have a personal auto policy then you do need to get the rental insurance to at least have the legally required liability coverage . Many credit cards also provide you some rental car insurance for free , so check with your credit card company too .
Auto coverage will vary slightly depending on your state . However auto insurance is typically broken down into the following coverages : Liability Bodily Injury - Pays to cover the medical expenses of the damaged party -LRB- typically another driver and their passengers -RRB- if you cause an accident . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . There is a limit per person and an aggregate limit per accident . Liability Physical Damage - Pays to cover damage to vehicles or other physical property -LRB- mailbox , guardrail , traffic signal , etc. -RRB- caused by the insured -LRB- you -RRB- . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . Uninsured Motorist Liability & Uninsured Motorist Physical Damage - This coverage protects the insured against motorists without insurance or with insufficient limits to cover medical and physical damages to the insured . This pays up to the per person and aggregate limits listed on the policy . Collision - Pays the cost to repair/replace your vehicle if you hit something/someone minus the deductible listed on your policy . Note that if your vehicle is a total loss then you will be compensated based on the actual cash value of your vehicle which is the value of your vehicle considering depreciation . Other Than Collision -LRB- Comprehensive -RRB- - This coverage pays to repair/replace your vehicle for theft , vandalism , hail , damage by animals , etc minus the deductible on your policy . If your vehicle is a total loss it will be valued on an actual cash value basis . Personal Injury Protection - Pays for medical/disability expenses of the insured for an injury occurring in or around your vehicle up to the limit listed on the policy . Accidental Death & Dismemberment - Small life insurance component often added to auto policies that will pay a death benefit if you die or are permanently disabled in an auto accident . Towing/Roadside Assistance - Varies significantly by company and state Rental Coverage - Covers the cost of a rental vehicle for the time that your vehicle is in the shop due to a covered loss . There are multiple levels and this coverage may not cover the full cost of the rental .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
Yes the internet is flooded with thousands of insurance companies , insurance brokers , agents offering auto insurance rates online . It just takes a few minutes and few clicks on the mouse . The best thing about getting auto insurance is the competition among the carriers . Because of such competition , many of them offer the cheapest auto insurance rates for you . Shopping for the best auto insurance rates on the internet allows you the option whether or not to talk to an agent as well . Make sure when online have your old policy ready so you can refer to it for some of the questions you will have to answer . When buying a policy online or offline make sure you fully disclose your driving record . In some States while youre at it , check your credit score . Some auto insurance companies will not run your driving record at the time of purchase but they will run it on the back end and once they find out about your driving history and your credit , your rates will increase . So do the research before you buy .
Many auto insurance companies will use credit scores to determine the premium rates to charge . Credit scores have proven to be very effective at predicting future claims . On the flip side auto insurance companies do not report claims data . When your report is accessed by the auto insurance company a soft inquiry is logged . Creditors and credit scores do not see soft inquiries , and therefor do not impact your score .
You can have two auto policies but not on the same car . I have many clients that own small business and they have a business auto policy and a personal auto policy which then gives them a multi policy discount on the personal auto and cost them much less per auto and the business auto they use the insurance premium as a business expense on their taxes .
Uber is an interesting new concept and with it there are new questions . Without reading your policy I can only give you a general answer but the personal auto policies I have read and studied have an exclusion related to the use of the auto to carry passengers for a fee without an endorsement modifying the limitation . I snagged this particular exclusion language for you from the ISO Personal Auto Policy -LRB- a common base for auto insurers to use in creating coverage -RRB- : For that `` insured 's '' liability arising out of ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . Source : ISO Personal Auto Policy PP 00 01 01 05 . There might be newer versions but this has been a longstanding limitation in the personal auto policy .
Car insurance can start immediately . When you sign up for auto insurance , either directly through the insurance company -LRB- typically done online -RRB- or through an agent , you have the option of setting the effective date of the policy . For example , if you are purchasing a new car you can sign up for insurance at the auto dealer online and print out proof of insurance immediately . Even if you purchase new auto insurance through an agent he/she can draft a proof of auto insurance on an ACORD form for you in the office .
Assuming the GPS was stolen from inside an insured auto , the answer is maybe . If the GPS was installed in the car -LRB- e.g. , permanently attached in the dashboard -RRB- and the car had comprehensive coverage , then the GPS theft would be covered subject to the comprehensive deductible . However , if the GPS was of the type like mine that you affix to the windshield with a suction device , that would not be considered `` installed equipment '' and would not be eligible for the car 's comprehensive coverage . In that case , your only other possibility for coverage on the auto insurance would be if your policy provided additional coverage for personal items inside the car . Most standard auto coverage forms do not include additional coverage for personal items , but some do - usually capped at $ 1,000 - $ 2,000 . Also , your auto policy may have an added endorsement that provides coverage for personal items . The last resort - you may be able to claim the GPS theft on your homeowners -LRB- or renters policy -RRB- if the auto policy does not cover it .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Happens To Homeowners Insurance When Someone Dies ?
The homeowners policy covers the property . In that regard the policy would continue to protect the home . It would be wise to contact the insurance agent and have the insured changed to reflect the new ownership . Mortgage companies require continuous coverage so it is important to keep coverage in place .
Yes , when someone gets life insurance on someone else , the person who purchased the policy is the policy Owner . The other person whose life is being insured , is called the Insured . It is the Owner who makes the decisions about the policy , such as naming the beneficiary , which bank account to pay the premium from , etc. . Obviously , you would want everything to be above board if you were going to be the Insured in a policy owned by someone else . One reason someone might want to own a policy on someone else 's life is if they would suffer a great loss if that person died . E.g. . The Insured owed the Owner a great deal of money , and the life insurance policy would repay that debt if the borrower died . Or the Insured owned the home where the policy Owner was living , and that policy would enable the policy owner to purchase the home when the Insured person died . Unless there is a very close family tie , this type of insurable interest in actually required in order to take out a life insurance policy on someone else .
Anyone that depends solely on their paycheck to get by needs to insure it against a disabling eventthat might require extended rehabilitation . An insurance company will not underwrite someone that has a large amount of passive or unearned income . They will also not insure someone that does not medically qualify . Finally , an insurance will not replace 100 % of one 's lost income because a -RRB- the insured would then have no incentive to return to meaningful employment , and 2 -RRB- the maximum monthly income replacement is around 2/3 of lost income and it is income tax free -LRB- if the insured pays out of pocket -RRB- . Permanent total disabilitycan bea living death . Not having the ability to bring in any income at all is one of the worst things that can happen to a person , especially to us ego-driven males . Total disability was -LRB- prior to 2009 -RRB- the single most likely reason for losing one 's home . In short , the consequences of a disability can be worse than death . There are various statistics that show how often disabling events occurs , but who cares about statistics ? If it happens to you , statistics do n't pay the bills . One should buy DI early in their working life . That 's when it is inexpensive and the premium can be guaranteed not to go up -LRB- unless additional coverage is purchased later -RRB- . Group DI is not portable . Own your own coverage . If you do n't have it yet . get it .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
This depends on what is happening with the annuity when someone dies and what type of annuity -LRB- owner or annuitant driven -RRB- we 're talking about . For an annuity that is not paying income and the owner is the annuitant -LRB- i.e. the type of contract wo n't matter -RRB- , the cash value of the annuity will be paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- in the contract . If the annuity have been annuitized -LRB- i.e. is paying an income stream -RRB- the chosen option will determine what happens . For life only annuity payments , the payments will stop and no further money will be paid out . For period certain annuities , the income will continue until the period certain has ended . For life with a refund -LRB- installment or lump sum cash -RRB- than the refund will pay the the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- until the cash value of the annuity has been paid out in full to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- .
Yes . Many individuals will set up a short term disability policy as well as a long-term disability policy to cover different types of scenarios -LRB- e.g. if you become permanently disabled vs. being temporarily disabled -RRB- . Some individuals will have a group DI policy through an employer and supplement it with an individual DI policy if they feel the group DI does n't provide enough benefits or a very good `` definition of disability '' -LRB- the most important factor with DI coverage -RRB- - when buying disability insurance , make sure of -LRB- and understand -RRB- the definition of disability that 's being cited in the program -LRB- own occupation , modified , or gainful - this is the most important factor in your disability policy as it will determine if you are eligible for a claim when something happens -RRB- . Please note , disability insurance policies coordinate benefits so there 's a limit to how much coverage and what kind you can secure -LRB- most carriers will keep it to a maximum of 70 % of income - the percentage can vary by insurance company -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help setting up coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability Income insurance -LRB- DI -RRB- being expensive is a relative question , and the question back is `` Relative to what ? `` Then , it becomes a question of value : `` Does the value provided by a policy that replaces up to about 2/3 of one 's income if they become unable to work due to accident or illness justify the premium the agent is showing me ? `` First , let 's just deal with the question of cost . Disability income insurance does become expensive the older one gets . Whereas the premium for a DI policy might run about 1-2 % of one 's income in their 20 's , it could cost about 4-5 % of their income in their late 40s or 50s . After age 60 , few carriers will even consider an application for DI insurance -LRB- although there are specialty carriers that will write `` term '' DI over that age -RRB- . DI is a complex insurance contract and has many `` moving parts '' . The more risk you want to transfer to the insurance company -LRB- amount of income to replace , inflation protection of income being replaced , future purchase of monthly benefit without the need to medically qualify , to name a few -RRB- , the higher the premium.Obtaining DI insurance through employee benefits may cost nothing - the employer picks up the tab for all employees . There may also be options to `` buy up '' additional coverage not provided in the employer-paid portion of the coverage . This is an inexpensive way to get at least some coverage against the risk of not being able to work for an extended period of time.Buying one 's own DI contract , however , puts the policyowner in control of all costs and coverage available from the insurance company . Whereas group DI can be canceled without notice by an employer , and when one leaves employment with that company DI coverage is rarely portable , owning one 's own policy usually provides the best , long-term solution to the problem . When you own your own DI , your coverage can not be cancelled . Premiums may also be guaranteed to never go up . And , regardless of where you work after getting your own policy , you 're covered.So , is DI expensive ? Run the numbers on yourself . If you could n't work for an extended period of time - or never be able to work -LRB- permanent and total disability -RRB- - how would you pay the cost of living ? Mortgage payments ? Food ? Rent ? Clothing ? Car payments?One is more likely to experience a disabling event in his/her lifetime than to die prematurely . Insure your paycheck . The cost is worth it .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
In general , no , home insurance will not cover wet rot . A homeowners policy is there to protect you from the sudden and accidental , not the ongoing . To file a claim , you have to be able to pinpoint what happened and when it happened . Wet rot describes a long time , ongoing circumstance . Your homeowners policy is designed to make you whole after an `` occurrence '' . It 's not designed to maintain your home . If you have a condition that could , potentially , damage your home , it 's the homeowners responsibility to correct that condition to protect your home from future damage . This brings up the question of the cost of your homeowners insurance . Every claim impacts the loss ratio of your company and , ultimately , your rates . Want to control the cost of your homeowners insurance ? Take a higher deductible and pay for the smaller things yourself . You 'll save money in the long run .
If the primary beneficiary dies prior to the insured a few different things can happen . First , when the primary beneficiary dies , the next in line or contingent beneficiary would be next to pay . If a third or tertiary beneficiary was named , then they would be next in line for death benefit proceeds if both primary and contingent beneficiaries die prior to the insured . If there is no contingent beneficiaries listed after the primary and the insured dies , then the death proceeds would be left to the estate . This is not the ideal situation because it can cause the proceeds to be taxed with the estate that are normally tax free . It also ties up the death proceeds up in probate court instead of paying directly to the beneficiary tax free .
Overlap on annuities is when an annuity pays two incomes to a surviving dependent for a period of time . It happens when someone purchases a Joint Annuity that is also a Guaranteed Annuity and dies before the guaranteed period is ended . If they have chosen to have the annuity payments start upon their death , and have set up the annuity on an overlap basis , the policy will pay the dependent two incomes until the guaranteed period is ended .
You dont have to bother if you dont have to . At least in this country for the time being , life insurance is not something that the government forces us to buy . And I hope the day never comes , because it would really mess up the life insurance marketplace . So the purchase of life insurance is voluntary . Who , then , should buy it ? If you are a billionaire , should you buy life insurance ? Sure you should . Lets suppose your estate would owe the government $ 100 million in taxes when you die . To pay this fee , your heirs might have to liquidate a bunch of businesses and buildings and other assets . They would then pay the bill dollar for dollar . Or , you could buy life insurance and pay the bill for pennies on the dollar . And keep all your assets intact as an inheritance for your heirs . Not only that : lets suppose you started a foundation to eliminate world hunger or some other noble cause . Lets suppose you wanted to leave the charity $ 100 million as a gift when you died . If you bought a life insurance policy and left that to the charity , you would only have to pay a few cents in premium for every dollar a benefit . You would have that much more money left over for other good causes . A very good use of your money . Now , lets suppose youre not a billionaire . Should you buy life insurance ? Heres the question : do you have a more economical way to take care of your family ? They have become dependent upon you . Why force them to reduce their standard of living when you die ? You could start putting money away into a fund . But what happens if you tragically died next year ? Would you have really accumulated enough money to let them live their lives ? Life insurance would provide them with all the money they need as soon as it is needed . No other financial product comes to the rescue like that . Why not die looking like a hero , as someone who cared and took measures to provide for his love ones ?
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
This depends on the type of contract . There are two types of annuity contacts : 1 . Owner driven contracts 2 . Annuitant driven contracts What happens on death depends on which type . For an owner driven contract , when the owner dies the contracts cash surrender value is paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- of the contract . For annuitant driven contracts , when the annuitant -LRB- not necessarily the owner -RRB- dies the cash surrender value of the contract is paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- of the contract . Almost all contracts issued today are owner driven contracts . Most annuitant driven contracts found today are older annuity contracts . It is prudent to figure out which kind of contract you have , especially if you have a different owner and annuitant .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
One example of key person life insurance would be to guarantee a quick and easy sale of the business upon the owner 's death . For example If the owner has a wife and children that are not active in the business and would have no idea how to run it , they would probably sell it in a distressed manner if the owner died unexpectedly . If he has a key manager that would be the likely person to sell it to they can purchase a life insurance policy on the owner 's life with the key man as the policy owner . The business can bonus the money to pay the premium to the key man . An attorney will write up a buy-sell agreement and the if the owner dies , his manager has the money and an agreed on price to buy the business from the widow . This makes the transition much easier for the widow PLUS has the benefit of keeping your key employee from straying off and being attracted to greener pastures . When there are multiple business owners , they each need a life policy on each other plus a legal agreement so they can buy out the spouse 's interests if one of them dies . They do n't want a business partner just because she/he happened to be married to their former business partner .
Homeowners Insurance will not pay for dead tree removal . A tree is a plant and it is the homeowners obligation to show pride of ownership and to take care of his or her yard . Big plant or small it 's the homeowners responsibility to maintain . Also a dead tree just sitting there and has not caused any damage to the dwelling , therefore there is no claim . I know what your thinking . The tree is a potential hazard and could fall on the house and cause damage or hurt someone . If this were to happen and you were unaware of any potential hazard there would be coverage should the tree fall on your house . However , if you are aware the tree is a hazard and fail to mitigate the hazard you are negligent and are not living up to your obligation as a homeowners and risk having the claim denied .
Health insurance pays when someone is sick . Property insurance pays when there is damage to property . Life insurance pays when someone dies . It starts when people decide to get life insurance on themselves , or on others who have financial ties to them . They apply for coverage , comply with underwriting requirements -LRB- which may or may not include taking a free physical exam -RRB- , and then are issued policies . These policies include beneficiaries designated by the owners of the policies . When the insured persons in the policies pass away , their beneficiaries receive the amount of life insurance that was purchased by those policies . Of course , there are different types of life insurance that can provide cash value , additional benefits , etc. . But in a nutshell , that is how life insurance works .
If you were to cover every contingency of life with life insurance , you probably could not afford that much . Life insurance is a wonderful resource for the `` what if 's '' of life , but the `` what if 's '' can be endless . What if you died leaving your family without your income . What if before you died , you used up all your savings on doctor bills . Then , what if your spouse died shortly after you . What if the person you designated to care for your children , had just lost their job . What if ... . No one can have enough life insurance to cover every possible tragedy . But you can have enough life insurance to give your loved ones a chance . Providing them with enough income to give them time to adjust to life without you , without having to worry about getting a new job -LRB- or adding a second job to the one they already have -RRB- , is a good place to start . Giving them enough to live on until your children are grown , or for 10 years , is also a reasonable amount .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Disability Insurance Earned Income ?
Disability can be purchased in basically two ways : non deductible and deductible premiums . The conventional disability insurance policy is purchase with after tax dollars , so the benefits generated at the time of the claim are tax free . Tax deductible disability premiums need to qualify under the terms of the IRS , but if they qualify for tax deductible status , then they 're benefits at claim are taxed as ordinary income .
Earned income comes from the IRS regulations as a qualifier for being able to contribute to a Roth IRA . It means you must earn compensation through work you have performed for your efforts in one form or another . There are two ways to receive earned income : 1 -RRB- Work for someone who pays you -LRB- you 'll receive a W-2 -RRB- 2 -RRB- You own or operate a business or farm -LRB- Schedule C will be filed with your tax return -RRB- The IRS defines earned income as wages , salary , tips and other taxable employee pay ; Union strike benefits ; Long-term disability benefits received prior to minimum retirement age ; net earnings from self-employment if you own or operate your own farm or business ; income as a minister or member of a religious order or a statutory employee and have income . There are plenty of categories that are not counted as earned income . Here are examples of income that are NOT considered earned income : Interest and dividends , retirement income , Social Security benefits , Unemployment benefits , alimony , child support , pay received while an inmate in a penal institution . The bottom line is the IRS wants to make sure you are performing work that will ultimately get them more tax revenue before they will let you pour more money into a tax deferred or tax exempt vehicle .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability insurance you purchase without the financial contribution of your employer towards the premium expense of individual disability insurance will generally be free of income taxation . This tax treatment results from the circumstances . First , the money used to pay premiums are `` after-tax '' dollars . In other words , you already paid tax on the money used to pay the disability premiums when it was earned as income . Second , neither an employer or business will take a deduction on their tax returns for the payments made to provide the insurance to you . These two things make the income earned under a personal , individual disability policy free of income tax on the benefits . As a general rule , if a business pays for the a portion of the premium the benefit is probably taxable to some extent even when you contribute . The amount of the benefit that is taxable will be determined by the ratio of the total premium paid , compared against the premium amounts paid by the business and the individual . If the benefit is payable to a business the income is probably taxable . Corporate -LRB- or business -RRB- owned disability insurance can be designed to provide income or overhead expense protection . Overhead expense protection permits the deduction of cost on tax forms but the income is taxable . There is also the possibility that disability income coverage is used in a buy-sell agreement . When the benefit is paid to a business , as a general rule , the benefit is taxable . As in most instances , this general answer can not begin to address the variety of complicating circumstances so specific answers are best for specific situations .
Disability insurance is a way to protect your income if you were to become sick or disabled . If you were unable to work and earn an income because of a sickness or injury , a disability insurance policy would pay you a portion of your income so you could continue to live the lifestyle you are accustomed to . Think of how much your ability to earn an income is actually worth . If you make $ 40,000 per year and are planning to work for another 25 years , If you multiply your income by the number of years you will work then your ability to earn an income is worth $ 1,000,000 -LRB- $ 40,000 X 25 years -RRB- . The actual figure will be much higher because you will most likely get raises .
There are several rules that determine your eligibility to open a Roth IRA . 1 -RRB- You must first have an income . Did you have earned income in the current tax year ? 2 -RRB- If you earned income , did your income exceed the limits set by the federal government ? This income limit changes every year and is depends on your marital status and tax filing status to determine the maximum income . You qualify for a Roth IRA based upon your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You can not contribute more into a Roth IRA than you earned in income . For example , if you earned $ 5,000 for 2014 , that is your maximum contribution . 4 -RRB- The contribution limit in 2014 was $ 5,500 maximum . 5 -RRB- There is no maximum age where you are limited or prohibited from making a contribution to a Roth IRA . 6 -RRB- You are not required to take a mandatory distribution at age 70.5 like qualified IRA 's . 7 -RRB- You can contribute to a Roth IRA even if you participate in a retirement plan at work . Depending on circumstances there may be other rules but this gives you a few ideas .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 1 1/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
Typically you need disability insurance to cover the risk of losing your ability to earn a living . Once you achieve the point of not needing to earn income to live you would no longer need disability insurance . This could be from earning a residual income for life , aninheritance , large sell of assetsor simply retiring from work with an ongoing retirement income .
Annuity withdrawals from a non-registered immediate or payout annuity consist of an interest portion and a return of capital portion . In Canada , you are not taxed on the return of capital portion , but you are taxed on the interest portion . Think of annuities as the opposite of a mortgage . In a 25 year mortgage , early payments consist of mostly interest with little going towards the principle . With an annuity , the early payments you receive are mostly taxable interest and a little of your own principle . For those individuals who can qualify , a prescribed annuity equalizes the interest income . For example , with a 25 year annuity the total interest earned is divided by 25 and spread out equally over the term of the contact . Increased after tax income in the early years is the result . There are specific rules governing prescribed annuities , If you are interested in more information , please contact me . Income from a payout annuity may qualify for income splitting for income tax purposes . This allows you to transfer up to 50 % of the taxable income earned from the payout annuity . Missing out on the federal pension income income tax credit ? Income from a payout annuity may qualify for the $ 2,000 non-refundable tax credit . Note : Interest earned on a Guaranteed Investment Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also may qualify . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Your earning power over a lifetime is extremely significant . The odds of becoming disabled an average of 30 months during your life time is almost a probable event . Disability insurance is paycheck protection . Everyone should who has earned income should have it / Keep in mind that in addition to disability insurance for earned income , you can also secure coverage for your retirement contributions as well .
The premiums paid constitute the basis for the annuity . Income tax has been deferred on the earnings of the annuity . The first withdrawals from an annuity are considered earnings and are taxed as ordinary income . If this withdrawal is prior to age 59 the earnings are subject to a 10 % penalty . Once the earnings are exhausted the basis is returned tax free . If the withdrawals are in an annuity only a portion of the withdrawal is taxed as earnings .
Thanks for asking this great question ! Most commonly you may need supplemental disability insurance if you are a high earner and your existing coverage is through a group plan at work . Why is that ? Most group policies are not designed for high earning employees and may have a an income replacement amount that is not adequate for you . For example , a doctor earning $ 250,000 has group coverage that will cover up to a 60 % of income monthly , with a monthly maximum of $ 8,000 . In other words , their income replacement maximum it $ 96,000 per year . Do you think that going from $ 250k to $ 96k will a rude awakening in addition to being disabled ? Plus , that employer paid disability coverage will commonly be fully taxable as income . I hope that helps ! Ron
It would depend upon your present and projected income levels and the current amount of disability insurance you have . If you figure you 're going to top out at around $ 50,000 per year over the course of your life and you have a disability policy that would pay you around $ 33,000 + per year if you were disabled then you have effectively replaced your after tax net income . That 's not to say it would n't be wise to have more and to try to account for future inflation but your need for a supplement to maintain your current and projected lifestyle is not as great . On the other hand , let 's say you are a business owner , physician , executiveor really good salesperson who is earning $ 100,000 or more a year and you can reasonably expect that income level to be increasing in future years and your employer provides a disability insurance policy that tops out at replacing $ 50,000 of income . This amount would clearly be well short of replacing your current income level much less your anticipated future increases in income . Purchasing a supplemental disability policy , and try to get one that is not offset by your current disability policy , would be a wise decision in this situation .
All life insurance costs are based upon life expectancy , earnings and overhead . These in combination result in the cost for one year of coverage . When the period to be protected is longer than one year then there must be consideration given to the total cost of coverage and the earnings the company could anticipate . This is where you get a premium for a 10 , 20 , or 30 year term policy . Permanent insurance does not have a termination date and as a result must consider every conceivable coverage cost and establish a program where the earnings of the policy will be sufficient to meet those obligations as they arise . Whole Life is the traditional way to handle this issue and the company designs a plan that will provide a level amount of protection for the remainder of the insureds life in exchange for a level premium . A universal life policy differs from the whole life policy in that the earnings are not guaranteed . The company maintains a separate fund . This fund will have earnings that are different from the general fund . If the earnings are greater the cost of the policy will be lower , reflecting the earnings . Because the earnings are not guaranteed they change from year to year . This affects the companys ability to pay the full death claim . Each company issues an annual statement that shows the values and projected values . The insured can reduce or increase premiums at their own discretion .
Because the statically probability is youre going to need it . Disability insurance is paycheck protection , but it can also cover retirement contributions . In general terms disability benefits can generate 60 % of your earned income tax free or if your company pays for it and deducts , generate 80 % of your income , but its taxable . Then in addition to protecting your earnings , you can cover your annual contributions to your qualified retirement plan . And you should . Disability is one of the most neglected indemnification products on the market and it shouldnt be . The statistics are so overwhelming that you will experience a disability during your working life that may force you out of work for 30 months . Disability insurance is really paycheck protection and should be purchased in tandem with term life insurance .
Per wikipedia : Disability Insurance , often called DI or disability income insurance , is a form of insurance that insures the beneficiary 's earned income against the risk that a disability creates a barrier for a worker to complete the core functions of their work . For example the inability to focus or maintain composure as with psychological disorders or an injury , illness or condition that causes physical impairment or incapacity to work . It encompasses paid sick leave , short-term disability benefits , and long-term disability benefits . Statistics show that in the US a disabling accident occurs on average once every second . In fact , Nearly 18.5 % of Americans are currently living with a Disability , and 1 out of every 4 persons in the US workforce will suffer a disabling injury before retirement .
Like any other product or service `` expensive or cheap '' is subject . Is disability insurance worth it ? Absolutely , if you were injured or ill and unable to earn an income , it will be the best investment of your life . As far as cost , it depends on some many different factors it is impossible to quote without knowing more about a person 's situation . The average person can expect to pay 1 % to 3 % of their annual income in disability premiums in order to protect their earnings from an unthinkable disability situation .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 59 1/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 59 1/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 70 1/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 59 1/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
Nope . Long-term care insurance provides financial protection against the cost of having assistance with your daily life . For example , someone living in an assisted living facility or a nursing home has long-term care that is needed because without the assistance of others , they would not be able to live comfortably and would face difficulty getting around and taking care of themselves . Long-term care is typically most utilized by elder and retired persons . Long-term disability insurance refers to providing an income to you in the event you develop a disability that inhibits your ability to work in your field -LRB- make sure to check the definition of disability in your policy to see what qualifies as a disability - this can vary by company -RRB- . For example , if you 're a surgeon and develop a condition that affects your ability to perform surgery , that condition would affect your ability to earn an income in your field . To protect against the loss of income , a long-term disability policy would provide an income to you while you recover or transition to another occupation - again , this is where the `` definition of disability '' is critical . If you need assistance with your coverage , please feel free to send me an e-mail via the contact me button or give me a call . I 'm happy to help and there are no fees for my assistance . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Dental Implants ?
No . Routine dental services and procedures are not covered by Medicare . Medicare only pays for dental services that are conducted in a hospital - this is covered under Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- . You should purchase an individual dental insurance policy to secure benefits that cover dental care services / procedures .
Health insurance does not cover dental implants unless there is an accident and severe damage to teeth . Dental insurance may cover implants , however , dental insurance is limited to a fixed dollar amount each year . For example the most common dental insurance pays a maximum of $ 1,500 in benefits a year and only 50 % of major work . If the dental policy covers inplants it may pay 50 % of one or two in a year .
Medicare does not pay for tooth extractions when it 's a routine dental item - this would be covered under a supplemental dental insurance plan . If you do n't already have one , you should consider buying a dental insurance policy - they 're very affordable , are guaranteed issue , and can save you a lot of money . Some policies will even cover a percentage of the cost of an implant to replace the extracted tooth . If the extraction of a tooth was needed in conjunction with a covered procedure such as reconstructing a jaw from an injury at a hospital , then Medicare would cover it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most general dentistry services are excluded by original Medicare , this would include implants . Dental implants may be done for cosmetic reasons or as a more permanent alternative to a bridge or partial plate . Ask your dentist if there are discounts for paying in cash any time you need extensive dental work .
Dental procedures are generally not covered by your health insurance plan . This includes veneer 's , crowns , caps , implants , fixed appliances , etc. . If your tooth has been damaged as a result of an accident you may have some dental benefits under your health insurance plan . Same is true if you had oral surgery to treat a condition such as cancer . In that case restorative procedures would usually be covered by your health insurance plan .
Health insurance does not generally cover cosmetic surgery , so if the reason for the implant isjust breast enhancement then no it would not usually be covered . If the reason for the implant is reconstructive in nature due to a covered illness or accident then the implants may be covered .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for Esteem hearing implant because it is a fully implantable inner ear hearing aid , and hearing aids are excluded . Medicare will cover prosthetic devices that replace the function of the middle ear , but does not address whether Esteem is considered this type of prosthetic device .
Generally , Medicare will not pay for teeth implants , just as Medicare does not cover fillings , crowns or dentures . Since Medicare will do reconstructive surgery on the jaw , it is possible that a tooth implant might be approved if it is proved to be a necessary part of that particular surgery .
Medicare Part B does not cover routine vision exams and eyeglasses . However ... Prescription eyeglasses with standard frames -LRB- or one set of contact lenses -RRB- is covered by Medicare after cataract surgery that implants an intraocular lens . In addition to the above requirement , Medicare will only pay for contact lenses or eye glasses if you purchase from a supplier who is enrolled in Medicare . You are responsible for paying 20 % of the Medicare - approved amount , and the Part B deductible also applies . If you have Medicare Supplement insurance , the Part B deductible and co-insurance may be covered .
Medicare does not cover periodic eye exams for vision testing and does not cover eyeglasses , in most cases . Medicare will pay for one pair of eyeglasses following cataract surgery in which an introcular lens was implanted . Medicare will also pay for treatment or surgery by a medical doctor for eye disease .
Medicare does not normally pay for glasses . However , after cataract surgery where an intraocular lens has been implanted , Medicare Part B will pay for one set of standard glasses through a supplier enrolled in Medicare . In other situations , Medicare Part B unfortunately does not cover the cost of eyeglasses or contact lenses .
Yes , Medicare does cover cataract surgery under Medicare Part B when determined medically necessary . Medicare will only pay for the cataracts , not any other medical conditions that might have contributed to their development . Medicare will also cover the intraocular lens implants and one pair of glasses for use after the surgery .
Medicare does not pay for Viagra , Cialis , Levitra or other erectile dysfunction drugs . They are not covered in Part B Medicare and excluded by Part D Medicare Drug Plans . The coverage ended in 2006 , when Congress determined them `` lifestyle '' drugs instead of medically necessary drugs . Since then , penile vacuum pumps , or , if those are ineffective , implanted penile inflation devices , are the only treatments for erectile dysfunction that are covered by Medicare .
Breast implants are not covered by Medicare if done for cosmetic purposes . However , Medicare will cover breast prostheses following a mastectomy under Medicare Part A -LRB- if done on an inpatient basis -RRB- or Medicare Part B -LRB- if done on an outpatient basis -RRB- . The post-surgery brassiere is also covered by Medicare .
Cosmetic breast implants are not a covered expense under Medicare . Breast reconstructive surgery following a mastectomy is a covered expense under Medicare Part A and subject to the 2013 deductible of $ 1184 . Follow up treatment after discharge would be covered under Medicare Part B . You will need to satisfy your Part B deductible of $ 147 for 2013 .
This is a great question . Medicare normally does not cover operations for cosmetic reasons , however there are medical reasons in which a person may need implants . This is a very sensitive case by case situation . The best way to find out is to call Medicare directly or call your Part c provider or your broker and ask .
Medicare does not cover `` dental '' . While `` Medicare Advantage '' covers some `` preventive care procedures it does not cover extensive dental procedures . There are `` dental '' policies available the coverage is usually limited to $ 1000 per year . In most cases dental maintenance is best planned to have preventive cleaning done each year plus any required `` dental filling ' each year but then if you need more extreme procedures you will probably spend a chunk of your vacation funds in the dental office
Medicare and most Advantage plans will cover cataract surgery . Medicare not only covers the cost of surgery but also will pay for the cost of a lens implant . The Crystalens is a `` premium '' lens and you may be required to pay an additional fee over and above the Medicare allowance . Your doctor can advise you on your responsibility .
Unfortunately , Medigap does not cover routine dental examinations . Although Medigap Plans are designed to fill the gaps in Original Medicare , they will only pay for Medicare-covered services . Routine dental care is not covered under Original Medicare ; therefore , it is also not covered by Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- . Medicare will only pay for dental services that are an integral part of a Medicare covered procedure . Some exceptions include , reconstruction of the jaw following accidental injury , or extractions done in preparation for radiation treatment involving the jaw . Medicare Beneficiaries often purchase a separate dental plan to meet their individual needs . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Cataract surgery is one of the most common surgical procedures covered by Medicare . Most of the cataract claims are submitted during the first 18 months once becoming Medicare eligible . Medicare Part B will pay for standard surgery and a replacement lens implant if the claim is considered medically necessary . Your doctor can advise you about your out of pocket share .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is American Life Insurance ?
Since 2011 , American Life Insurance Company , also known as ALICO , has been a part of MetLife , the largest life insurance company in the US . It was acquired from AIG . It is a big , US based global life insurance company with a focus in Asia . Since then , some non strategic parts of the company in theCaribbeanwere sold to Pan-American Life .
There are many life insurance companies that have the word , `` American '' in their title . Are you certain that the entire name of the company is American Life Insurance ? If you are asking about American Life Insurance in general , it would be life insurance that provides coverage to persons in the United States .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
American General Life and Accident Insurance Company -LRB- AGLA -RRB- merged with American General Life Insurance Company -LRB- AGL -RRB- on January 1 , 2013 . At this time , no policies are issued by American General Life and Accident Insurance Company . American General life insurance products , accidental death policies , and annuities are now all written under the American General Life Insurance Company -LRB- AGL -RRB- .
That is an interesting question . I 've been an agent for many years , and I can speak from experience when I tell you that price is not based on color . I do not work with any companies -LRB- and I work with many -RRB- that would even consider breaking the law that way . That said , there are some things that come into play that might make you think -LRB- wrongly , I promise you -RRB- that It may cost more for African Americans . Life insurance costs are based in great part upon risk factors , including high blood pressure , diabetes , and obesity . These factors , along with heart disease are statistically common among all Americans , but much more so among African Americans . The American Heart Association in an article released last September suggests that a gene found in African Americans may be the cause for the highest rates of hypertension in the world . This disease is the leading cause of heart disease -LRB- # 1 killer of Americans -RRB- and strokes -LRB- # 4 killer -RRB- . Their article also outlines problems with obesity -LRB- 63 % of men , 77 % of women over 20 years old -RRB- among the community , as well as higher rates of diabetes -LRB- 2x as likely as whites to have it , among those 20 and older 15 % have the disease -RRB- . The US Dept. of Health and Human Services Office of Minority Health documents higher rates of cancers among the African American community in 2009 research , as well as higher mortality rates . Insurance companies are n't as concerned about the causes and reasons behind the statistics , as much as the heath issues of the applicants . If you are of any race , your rate will be higher if you suffer from diabetes or hypertension , especially if it has gone uncontrolled . The life expectancy of anyone with those issues is shortened , and so the companies bear more risk , and as a result charge more . The better the health , the cheaper the rates might be a simple way to put it , since the risk to the company determines the rate they will charge to insure you . If you smoke , expect to pay more . If you are overweight , expect to pay more . This will be true regardless of race , where you live , or the amount of coverage you apply for . I hope that this helps you understand how the industry works , and why it might seem like it is unfair . Thanks for asking !
Estimates of the numbers of uninsured Americans have always varied widely depending upon the definitions used . As of June of 2014 and the completion of the first open enrollment period for ObamaCare a firm count on the numbers of insured and uninsured Americans is yet to be announced . After all the effort , expense and turmoil associated with the passage and implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- the initial indications are that we have slightly reduced the number of uninsured Americans . A poll released in April , 2014 indicates that the uninsured rate declined from a peak of approximately 18 % in the summer of 2013 -LRB- which was the high point since the start of the recession in 2008 - the overall average uninsured rate for the 2008 through 2013 period was more in the 16 % to 16.5 % range -RRB- to approximately 15.6 % at the end of the first quarter of 2014 . This represented about a 1.5 % decrease in the uninsured population from January 1 , 2014 -LRB- 17.1 % -RRB- to the end of March , 2014 and our uninsured rate remains above the level that existed before the 2008 financial crisis . Assuming that we have a population of approximately 320 million in the United States , my math would indicate that leaves close to 50 million uninsured Americans . The number I hear and see used most often states that there are still more than 30 million Americans without health insurance . I ca n't reconcile the different numbers but what is clear is that our efforts to insure every American have fallen significantly short ofthe stated objective .
That is an excellent question ! The eventual collapse of Medicare and Medicaid has more than just economists worried . And I said eventual collapse , since I believe that it is much more likely that our current Government philosophy of income disparity politics will continue to prevent any kind of significant reform or refunding of those programs . Without overhauling , the system is predicted to bankrupt in 2024 . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- created a series of fat trimming cuts that in theory will add 5 years to the life of the programs . As of the 2012 Census statistics , 55 % of all seniors are currently at poverty level , and the statistics suggest that further cuts in just food stamps will double the currently 15 % of Americans living in poverty -LRB- 46.5 million households , and that number is woefully under estimated , as the formula for computing it is still based on 1963 data - bet you ca n't find a gallon of milk , or gas for what you paid in 1963 -RRB- . Jared Bernstein , a noted economist , calculates that the poverty rate will increase nearly 500 % when SSI tanks in 2030 . Now imagine the financial hardship on our Seniors , and our economy , when their medical expenses ca n't be paid for either . Something has to give , or we 'll be seeing our parents and grandparents out on the streets , or not at all . An interesting statistic ? 50 % of Americans combined own what the top 30 individual Americans do - $ 793 billion dollars . 47 % of Americans own nothing , their debt is equal to or greater than their assets . I 've been very blessed , God has been good to me and my family , but I 'm worried , and if you have parents or grandparents , you should be too , as millions of folks depend on it . Thanks for asking !
As of 3-24-2015 , the financial ratings for American General are : Standard & Poor 's - A + Moody 's Investor Service - A2 A M Best Company - A Fitch Ratings - A + American General and AGLA -LRB- American General Life and Accident -RRB- are now under the brand name AIG -LRB- American International Group -RRB- .
I think the real answer to your question is that no one knows for sure . Prior to the conclusion of the recent open enrollment period estimates ranged from somewhere in the 30 million to as high as 48 million Americans being uninsured . Certainly the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- has made some dent in this number but firm figures are difficult to obtain at this time -LRB- late April 2014 -RRB- and even the figures reported are subject to debate . If the goal of the Affordable Care Act was to eliminate Americans being uninsuredthen even the most optimistic enrollment figures of 10 million -LRB- when you include Medicaid expansion and young persons being able to stay on their parents policies until age 26 -RRB- show that we have fallen far short of eliminating the problem . And , some analysts do make the mistake of confusing enrollment with becoming insured and maintaining insurance coverage . Generally there is a 15 % to 20 % attrition rate in the individual marketplace for people who enroll but either fail to make their initial premium payment or discontinue paying -LRB- and thus their coverage -RRB- after a few months . There is little reason to think that the law will change human nature so the net impact on the number of uninsured Americans will probably be further diluted as the year progresses . When one takes into account that many enrollees being counted were previously insured under plans no longer compliant with the law 's requirements you have a fairly large amount of the enrollment really just being a transfer from one insured status to another . The end result is that there are fewer uninsured Americans today than there were a year ago but that number has not been reduced dramatically .
Aflac life insurance is sold through American Family Life Assurance Company of Columbus and American Family Life Assurance Company of New York , with group policies sold through Continental American Insurance Company . Aflac and its companies were rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . They have been selling good term and permanent products since 1955 .
That is a great question ! There are really two schools of thought about life insurance . One school believes that the money that someone would pay for a policy should be saved and invested , and those funds used to ensure the well being of the loved ones left behind . The second school of thought is buy young , and be prepared . I can see wisdom in both views . There can be much higher rates of return on the investments made with what would have been the premium money if invested wisely.But ... I am a pretty staunch realist , and the sad reality is that most Americans ca n't / do n't save , and even fewer know how to invest what they do . As a result , nearly 3/4 's of Americans live paycheck to paycheck , and are one disaster away from bankruptcy . -LRB- Want some scary data for your paper ? Go look at the 2012 Census data ... -RRB- Life insurance provides a `` forced savings '' method of providing for the need for protection . As long as the payments are made , your family is protected . And in my opinion , life insurance provides three serious benefits that the first view ca n't match : There is no guarantee on how long we live , and there is a real chance that disaster could strike before the amount needed to protect your loved ones could be accumulated . With a policy , if it 's in force one day , and you were -LRB- God forbid -RRB- to pass away in an accident on the second , the policy would pay out in full . What investment pays off that well ? Secondly , that benefit paid is tax free , and generally probate free . Many estate battles take years , and on average eat away about 40 % of the value of the estate that would have been left . The third , and in this economy that favors the wealthy and stresses the majority of Americans , a whole life policy provides a source of money in an emergency . As the policy increases in age , it also increases in its cash value . That value becomes available for the policy owner to withdraw if a need arises , with virtually no questions asked . With interest rates and credit ratings what they are for the majority , having a strings free cash source can be a life saver . I hope that gives you some food for thought for your essay . I almost forgot to mention that the younger you are when you purchase your policy , typically the cheaper it is . Most companies lock that price in for you , so it is set for your whole lifetime . As a result , a policy purchased in one 's 20 's typically will be cheaper , and much easier to get than a policy purchased when one is in their 50 's or 60 's . If you 'd like more help , please feel free to contact me . This is a lazy week for most of us , and I 'll have some free time :-RRB- Thanks for asking , and good luck on your paper !
Yes , American Income Life -LRB- AKA AIL -RRB- is located in Waco , TX . They wereformed with the name American Income Lifein 1954 . The owners of the company had operated under the name American Income as early as 1951 . They were purchased by Torchmark Corporation in 1994 for 563 million dollars . They are a legit insurance company .
According to research conducted by the Public Broadcasting Corporation for a series it did on uninsured American 's roughly 44 million Americans do not have health insurance . Based on the current total population of the United States this would mean a little over 85 % of Americans have health insurance coverage .
The PPACA or better known as Obamacare is a mandatory federal program where all Americans are to participate or pay a penalty . The program begins in 2014 . All Americans will participate in Obamacare , but not all will pay the full premium or may not pay at all based on means testing . The middle class may receive some credits to offset the premium , but for many low or no income Americans , theyll simply pay nothing . Keep in mind that almost half the country does n't pay federal taxes , so any short fall generated from Obamacare will fall to federal tax payers .
Beginning in 2014 health care will be mandatory for every American . The PPACA , or better known to the public as Obamacare , will be implemented six months from now . The intent of the legislation is to provide health coverage for every American at an affordable price , supposedly lower than current premiums today . Most economists and some government agencies predict that Obamacare will cost much more to operate than previously thought and will impact the economy adversely . Keep in mind that this is a federal program . Any short fall of the program will be borne by federal income tax payers . Only 53 % of Americans pay federal income taxes . Taxes will increase or the U.S. debt will increase or both with the imposition of Obamacare .
According to LIMRA , Life Insurance Marketing and Research Association , the nations leading expert on life insurance sales , the average person has a face amount of $ 165,000 in life insurance . Other interesting statistics on the subject find that 70 % of American households admit they would have financial difficulties if the primary wage earner were to die . So , 7 out of 10 people admit they do n't have enough life insurance in force . Out of this 70 % , 30 % of Americans have no life insurance at all , even though we are all guaranteed to die someday . Life insurance is just too important and affordable not to have enough for those loved ones left behind to pick up the pieces . For example , a young healthy 25 year old female can purchase $ 500,000 in term life insurance for as low as $ 12.62 per month . It is the most affordable insurance product on the market and yet one of the most under purchased for the level needed .
Western National Life was acquired by American General Life in late 2012 . American International Group -LRB- AIG -RRB- owns American General Life . So Western National Life is now part of American General , and American General is owned by American International Group . They are not the same , however , as American International Group is simply the parent holding company .
Good is a very subjective and relative term and this will depend on what sort of product or plan you are seeking through American Income Life . American Income Life is focused on final expense life insurance and supplemental health insurance . Pricing and competitiveness is dependent on your specific situation and how well you meet the risk profile they seek .
That is a great question ! With the over fifty attempted repeal tries , and the very public stances against it that the Republican party has , you are certainly right to wonder . But for all of the bluster and rhetoric , here 's what the reality is - the American public does like the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , as the uninsured rate is the lowest it 's been in decades . The Supreme Court decisions gives the Law solid legal footing . With an election looming , and still stinging from what most in the Republican party thought was going to be a slam-dunk win 4 years ago on a platform of repealing the Act , I think that the wiser leaders of the party know they need to rethink that strategy . As much as they dislike it , the voting electorate does like it , and sadly , many rely on the subsidies to be able to afford their coverage . The adding of Medicaid has progressed slowly but surely , even in the Red States that had spoken out against it , as leaders realize that after the nearly 2 decades of economic pressure , the average American needs the assistance . Even as there seems to be a to tendency to disregard facts in politics , when it comes down to where the votes are coming from , there can be softening or complete reversals of what had been very public stands on issues like health care.With the polling numbers falling solidly in favor of the Act , and the Law being upheld twice in the Supreme Court , I 'd suspect you will hear less talk of repealing the Act . That said , I 'm certain that each candidate will have an opinion on how he or she will change the Law to improve what does n't work as well as it could . There is intense pressure from the insurance companies to regain the incredible profits they were making , and other medical companies also would like to push their agenda 's , so the parts of the law that kept prices low I 'd expect to see attacked . So in short , repealed ? No . Changed ? Probably , depending upon the outcome of the election , and how the public responds to the proposed changes . A great question , and one we in the industry have been watching closely also . Thanks for asking !
Since 2011 , American Life Insurance Company , also known as ALICO , has been a part of MetLife , the largest life insurance company in the US . It was acquired from AIG . It is a big , US based global life insurance company with a focus in Asia . Since then , some non strategic parts of the company in theCaribbeanwere sold to Pan-American Life .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Park A Car On The Road Without Insurance ?
You could , whether or not you will receive a citation for not having insurance on the vehicle is another question . You would have to find out what your community 's ordinances are pertaining to auto insurance and your states regulations for auto insurance . You are more likely to receive a citation for not have insurance when you are driving the vehicle .
This is a complicated question and really depends upon the insurance laws of your state . No-Fault States : if you live in a no-fault state then you could potentially leave your car in the street without insurance ONLY IF your car is parked in a legal zone and in a safe manner . What I mean by this is you do not want your parked car to be at risk for any liability in the case of an accident . For example , if you are parked on the street outside your house and it is within a couple of inches of the curb and no where near a fire hydrant , then if someone hits your car they will collect against their own insurance and you will not be liable if they sustain any severe physical injuries . However , if your car is in an illegal parking zone or you parked far from the curb , then the person who struck your auto might have cause for a liability suit against you . As a word of caution , just remember that you can get sued regardless of fault and you will have to defend the case until it is dismissed for lack of liability . This means you will still have to pay for an attorney , so it is better to have insurance . Tort-State : you need insurance because they person who hits your parked car will sue you to reclaim collision damages . Please note this is a very brief answer and there are other possible scenarios in both no-fault states and tort-states that can lead to you being sued for having your parked car in the street . I hope this helps .
Yes , of course . Not all auto claims involve the police or require an accident report . If the car is involved in an accident of some sort on a public road or highway , or if it is stolen or vandalized , then yes , a police report would be a potential requirement . If however , your car is hit while legally parked , or if a tree falls on it , or you hit a curb or pothole or your garage door while backing out , these are some examples of claims situations where the police would not be involved .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
This will vary by company . Some insurance providers will let you put your autos in suspense meaning the policy would be reduced to physical damage only and can not be operated on the road . You would pay a minim premium on your auto while parked and the vehicle would still be covered in the event of a potential theft or fire for example . I recommend you discuss this with your agent .
Great question ! The answer depends upon a couple of things - your policies coverage , and where the laptop was when it was stolen . If it was taken from your apartment , then it generally will be . If it was in your car , parked in the apartment parking lot , there 's a good chance that you can get it replaced . If it was stolen at school , or you left it on a bus somewhere , that might be a whole lot harder to get back . I 'd advise you to contact your agent and tell them the story , and see what exactly your policy covers . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
Great question ! You will need an auto insurance policy if you or anyone else will be driving the car . I would advise that the car be covered if it is not going to be driven , but is in an area where it might be hit or vandalized if it is parked . If you have any risk of having to pay for the damage done to the car , then you may want to have it insured . If you need help , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
The portion of an auto policy that covers damage caused by hitting a deer is the `` Comprehensive '' portion of the physical damage coverage . Physical damage coverage for your car is divided into two portions : Collision and Comprehensive . Collision is the more narrowly defined of the two and provides coverage if your car is damaged as a result of hitting another car , a stationary object or a human.Comprehensive covers everything else , for example , a deer strike , vandalism , somethig falling on it while parked , etc. .
There are some companies that will allow you to purchase an insurance policy without a driver 's license . Typically you must have another licensed driver listed on the policy as they will exclude you from coverage , but it is feasible . Also , if you are looking for physical damage only on the vehicle while it is parked you would not be required to have a valid driver 's license . Talk to a broker to get the full story in your state .
That is an excellent question ! I am asked all the time why `` I need insurance if I do n't need it '' . I always explain it like this - the whole purpose of protection is to help prevent a bad thing from being worse , right ? Throughout history we 've built fences , moats , armies , etc. to protect ourselves from a potential attack . Did those things get used every day ? Nooope . Once in a great while , but they were immensely helpful when they were needed . That 's the idea behind insurance . You may have years of safe driving under your belt without so much as a parking ticket , but you have no control over the chance that the guy coming around the corner towards you wo n't be coming from the bar , or texting away on his phone . When something like that happens , the insurance is a Godsend . Who has the money to settle a lawsuit or replace a totalled car , let alone repairs or a rental ? Having everyone required to have insurance evens out somewhat the odds that anyone is left unprotected in the event of an accident , and greatly increases your ability to pay for those repairs , replacements , rentals , or reparations , should they be needed . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Police may not respond to an accident . They avoid accidents in parking lots -LRB- the scene of many accidents . -RRB- With the proliferation of smart phones , a detail evaluation of a claim can be made by submitting photos of the damage to your car , and any other cars , people or objects . Auto theft is a crime and must be reported to the police .
Assuming that your car insurance policy includes physical damage coverage for `` Comprehensive '' loss , then yes , you will have coverage if you hit a deer or any other animal . This coverage will also pay settlements for theft , vandalism , if your car bursts into flames or if an object falls on it while it is parked .
The Comprehensive portion of your policy 's physical damage coverage would cover the damage caused to your car by a falling tree provided that the car was parked and stationary at the time . The claim would be settled subject to your deductible of course . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . .
This isa broad question that I 'm sure will generate many different answers , but here is mine and I hope it helpsanswer your question . As you know , many drivers are distracted by their cell phone . Texting , internet applications , and email -LRB- unfortunately -RRB- arejust a few things that many drivers do while driving . Until we all are driving autonomous vehicles , this will always be an issue of concern . These distracted drivers are the onesyou need to look out for and try tostay as far away as possible . The cell phonedistractions are the causes ofmany collision claims . With regard to `` other than collision '' claims , such as avoiding hail damage etc. , just be aware of the daily weather conditions and the potential for a hail storm in your area . If you can get your vehicle to an underground garage such as a mall parking lot , or back to your home with a garage you will be able to avoid a costly `` other than collision '' claim.There is a company that is selling hail protector car covers that inflate remotely around your car like an airbag . That would be another option if you are unable to leave work or return to your home where you may have shelter for your automobile . I suggest googling `` hail car protector . `` In a nutshell , just be careful and practice defensive driving . Keep your eyes open and constantly scan your surroundings and please do n't use your cell phone while driving . I hope this answered your question and let me know if I can further assit you in your personal insurance needs .
The minimum insurance requirement in California is called the financial responsibility requirement . All drivers in California are required to carry evidence that the car that they are operating is insured to these set standards . The standards are $ 15,000 per person of bodily injury liability coverage , and $ 30,000 of bodily injury liability coverage for death to more than one person . There must be % 5,000 of property damage liability insurance in place . Insurance isnt mandatory . There can be a cash deposit with the DMV of $ 35,000 , or a certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California , or a surety bond for $ 35,000 issued by a company authorized to do business in California . Insurance is the choice of most vehicle owners . The companies that insure cars in California are required to report the status of the policies of insurance electronically to the DMV . If you decide to no longer operate the automobile and it is not parked on a California highway or street , you must notify the DMV that you are suspending coverage , and why . The minimum coverage law allows you to purchase the most expensive auto insurance policy available . While it may be adequate in many circumstances , in those circumstances where the damages sustained exceed the limits of the policy the vehicle owner will discover that all of their assets are in jeopardy and there will not be anything to help the owner , except bankruptcy .
If you do n't own a car that is registered in your state , indefinitely . However , in most if not all states , if you own a car and register it for use on public roads and highways , having insurance is a legal requirement . Without it , States can impose fines and cancel registrations . If you have a lien or a lease , the finance company can repossess your car . Short answer , not long . Best answer if you have a car and privileges you want to keep , do n't go without for any length of time .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
Great Question . Most insurance companies will ask year of the vehicle , Vin number of the vehicle . how many miles driven a year , what is the address the vehicle will be parked at night , Driver information . date of birth , driver license number , married or single and what coverage you desire on your car .
The first penalty is that you more than likely would not be able to register your car for use on public roads . Most States require car insurance in order to do that . If you had car insurance but let it lapse , or cancel it , the Insurance Company in many states like Connecticut , will notify the Department of Motor Vechicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- . They will contact you and require you to show proof of coverage . If you can not , they will suspend your registration andit will be illigal to drive your car -LRB- s -RRB- . If you do drive and are stopped by a police officer , along with the charge for which you have been stopped , you will also be found to be driving an unregistered and uninsured car which will add to the size of your fine . In many cases the car will be towed and impounded and you will have to find another means of transportation back home , for which you may have to pay . You may also be required to appear in court . Once that is behind you , in order to get your car back , you will have to show proof that you have bought insurance again . It will be more expensive now because of the violations and the fact that you have not had continuous coverage . You will also have to pay to have the car releassed from the impound facility . You will have lost considerable time from work for all of this meaning that on top of having to shell out more money , you will have lost pay . Bottom line ... do n't drive without insurance .
Car insurance does not always go up after a claim . If it is an at-fault accident , unless you have a `` forgiven '' clause , the premium will increase . But non at-fault accidents , including when your vehicle was parked should not impact prices . Comprehensive claims such as glass breakage may not increase your rates either . However , each carrier has different underwriting guidelines , so it is best to check with a broker for specific advice .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Life Insurance Cover ?
Life insurance covers death by any reason -LRB- except suicide in the first two years -RRB- . That is whether death occurs by accident , illness , or `` old age '' . There may be some exclusions as death due to an act of war , or death that occurs during the act of committing a felony . Life Insurance covers a person -LRB- called the Insured -RRB- , and when the Insured dies , it pays the face amount of the life insurance to the Beneficiary .
Interesting question . Makes me wonder if the above answers address what you meant to ask . So the points covered above are mostly what term life insurance does cover . What term life insurance does NOT cover is the risk of death after so many years as specified in the contract . Hence the `` Term '' In the name . Also term insurance ca n't be purchased for a person of 80 or the latest 85 years of age . Term insurance has no cash value so it does n't `` cover '' the need for a guaranteed tax-free growth of wealth like a Whole Life Insurance can . Term insurance ca n't `` cover '' the need for retirement income supplement like Whole Life can . As mentioned above no insurance including Term will cover suicide in the first two years of the policy . And of course also as mentioned above there is a contestability period with all life insurance to mitigate deliberate misinformation in order to obtain a policy . If fraud is proved on a claim within the contestability period the claim will be denied .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is : What does term life insurance cover ? Remember first of all , if we 're using term , it only covers that period in time . If you buy a 20-year term , as an example , it 's only going to cover you for 20 years . If you buy $ 1/2 million dollars of death benefit , you 'll have it for as long as you pay your premiums on time ; you 'll have that coverage . What is it good for ? How does it cover ? It 's going to cover anything that you think that you need . Let 's say , at $ 1/2 million , you had a mortgage at $ 250,000 , you had credit card debt , you had car debt , you had educational debt . You want to cover that so that your spouse or your beneficiaries will not be actually saddled with your debt if something happened to you . When I 'm looking at , ` What does term life insurance ? ' it 's the time zone , how long do I have , what obligations would I have , and how can I relieve my beneficiaries from any of those obligations if something happens to me ?
Condo Insurance can be tricky since often an HOA is involved . What first needs to be determined is what does the HOA actually cover . Does the HOA cover any part of the building . If so then we as agents determine what is already covered and look to fill the gaps . I can tell you that the HOA does not cover your personal liability , loss of use , guest medical and personal property so these coverage 's are needed at the very least . You will want to consult with a local independent agent to help you determine coverage 's needed for your condo policy .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not includeHPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not include HPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
The government provides Medicare Part A & B . If you want drug coverage and/or supplemental coverage to pay what Medicare does n't cover , you must buy that separately . A broker/agent can help you with that . The benefits schedule -LRB- literally -RRB- shows what is covered . If you would like to see what Part A & B cover , I suggest going to www.medicare.gov ... then click `` What Medicare Covers '' .
A Medigap policy plugs the gaps that Medicare A & B does n't cover . A person can get a Medigap plan part of what Medicare does not may or they can get a Medigap plan to cover all of what Medicare does not pay . The cost varies depending on which plan a person chooses .
Great question ! While there are some policies that will cover a few cases of death , the vast majority will not . Many people assume that homeowners insurance covers much more than it does , so I can not stress enough the importance of understanding exactly what the policy does and does n't cover before purchasing it . There may be cases where Liability coverage may cover , but again , it is a life insurance policy that typically pays as a result of a death , very rarely your homeowners . If I can help you more with this , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
It depends on many factors , but here are the main factors for price . 1 -RRB- What 's the policy type ? 2 -RRB- What 's the face amount ? 3 -RRB- What 's your gender ? 4 -RRB- What 's your age ? 5 -RRB- What 's your general health like ? 6 -RRB- Are you a tobacco user ? What you should look at are basically two main questions . What does the life insurance cover and how much do I need ? Cost is a factor for a policy , but it 's much more important to get the right policy with the riders you 'll need .
Medigap is a supplemental health insurance policy that can be purchased to go along with Medicare Part A and Part B . It is used to cover the costs that Medicare does not cover . Medigap does not fit in with Medicaid as Medicaid covers all medical costs and does not have the `` gaps '' of coverage that Medicare does .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Title insurance is not homeowners insurance . Title insurance is what a Title company will take out to protect you and the Title companyin-casethe Title is not clean . Here is an example . You buy a house from John Doe . The Title company does there job and sees John Doe is the only owner and the sale and transfer of title is clean . However John had asisternamed Jane Doe that no one knew about who was also on title of the home and did not approve of the sale . What now ??? This is where title insurance would come in . Title Insurance would pay for any potential loss due to abotchedup deal . Usually the title insurance would pay off Jane to complete the sale since it was already finalized but there are several different ways this could go . I hope this helps to give you an idea of how title insurance works .
What does life insurance do ? That is a great question . Auto insurance pays to repair your car , home insurance pays to repair your home , health insurance pays to repair your health . But life insurance does not pay to repair your life . Rather , life insurance pays when death occurs . It 's purpose is to `` repair '' some of the financial damage that is incurred upon the death of a loved one and/or provider . That is not all life insurance does - there are many reasons that people purchase life insurance . But it is the basic purpose .
You really need to turn this one around and focus on what renters insurance does cover . Then , you can analyze your needs and interests in relation to what is covered and what is not and make your decisions accordingly . If you feel that you have a need for protection for something that does not appear to be covered in the policy , you might be able to add it through an endorsement , for an additional sum of money . An independent local agent can help you with this type of assessment . I think you will find that renters insurance coverage is fairly broad for many typical loss types in relation to renting , including often overlooked but very important liability coverage .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Does Medigap Work ?
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best way to buy a Medigap Policy is through a licensed independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . We work closely with you to make sure you understand the benefits associated with Medigap Plans and how they work for you . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . Instead , we have contracts with multiple carriers that allow us to shop the Medigap market and find you the best price for the Medigap Plan you desire . Some people like to avoid insurance agents and do the work themselves , but with Medigap insurance that is not going to save you time or money . Most insurance companies will not provide their insurance premium information to the public . The carriers who do share their premiums with you will , often times , be much more expensive . I have done a fair share of helping people move from their expensive Medigap premium to a lower one while still keeping their same exact benefits . Most of the time they had no idea there were other insurance companies available to them . If I can help you with your Medigap insurance needs , please feel free to call me at 1-888-411-1329 or visit www.remedigap.com .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Since all Medigap plans are standardized , the benefits are exactly the same with every insurance company . This means that Medigap Plan F with ABC insurance company is the exact same Medigap Plan F with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is price . Medicare does not regulate the price of Medigap Plans ... just the benefits . That 's why there is such a competitive market . Many Medicare Beneficiaries like the idea of purchasing Medigap through a well known insurance company , but that does n't mean you are going to get the best price . Medigap is not like health insurance for under age 65 where a Medical director approves or denies your bills . Medigap payments are made by the insurance carrier if it 's a Medicare approved item because they have to -- it 's the law . I suppose that was the long way of saying there is n't one insurance company that has the best Medigap coverage . They all offer the same standardized plans and pay the bills based upon CMS regulations .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Most people enjoy Medigap Plan F because of it 's comprehensive health coverage and consider it to be the best Medigap policy . Medigap Plan F will pay all your Medicare approved charges that Original Medicare Part A and Part B does n't cover . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance with Plan F . There is a lot of talk about Medigap Plan G becoming the `` best '' Medigap Plan . It works just like Plan F by covering all your Medicare approved charges not paid by Original Medicare -- after you 've satisfied the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium with Plan G is usually much less than Plan F. Even when you add in the Part B deductible there is still savings for the same Medigap benefits . If I can assist you with your specific Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
Medigap is health insurance sold by private insurance companies . Each insurance company has it 's own set of Medigap premiums . These premiums are usually based on the Medicare recipient 's zip code , age and tobacco status . Cost of your premium will also depend on which Medigap Plan benefits you want to buy . The best way to see how much a Medigap Plan will cost is to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . In just a matter of minutes , we can provide you with the insurance companies and premiums available in your area -- and , not just with the insurance carriers you see online . Once you have quotes tailored to your criteria , you 'll know exactly how much Medigap insurance will cost . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
It depends on your needs , budget , and preferences . I would recommend consulting with an independent Medigap broker who can work with you on a personal level and help you evaluate your options . If you want to create a predictable healthcare expense structure where you do n't have to worry about receiving massive medical bills , you may want to consider buying a Medigap plan -LRB- most likely a Medigap Plan F or Plan G -RRB- . The premiums for Medigap plans are typically a little higher than a Medicare Advantage plan , but they feature much broader coverage . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable and are standardized -LRB- meaning a given Medigap plan features the same benefits regardless of the carrier you have it through - a plan F from company ABC is the same plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . They also have no networks , meaning you can go to any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- the vast majority do these days and you can check to see if a doctor in your area does using a physician finder tool on Medicare 's website , Medicare.gov -RRB- . As far as services go , if your doctor accepts Medicare , then they have to accept your Medigap plan as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on your needs , budget , and preferences . I would recommend consulting with an independent Medigap broker who can work with you on a personal level and help you evaluate your options . If you want to create a very well-controlled , predictable healthcare expense structure where you do n't have to worry about receiving massive medical bills , you may want to consider buying a Medigap plan -LRB- most likely a Medigap Plan F or Plan G -RRB- . The premiums for Medigap plans are typically a little higher than a Medicare Advantage plan , but they feature much broader coverage . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable and are standardized -LRB- meaning a given Medigap plan features the same benefits regardless of the carrier you have it through - a plan F from company ABC is the same plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . They also have no networks , meaning you can go to any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- the vast majority do these days and you can check to see if a doctor in your area does using a physician finder tool on Medicare 's website , Medicare.gov -RRB- . As far as services go , if your doctor accepts Medicare , then they have to accept your Medigap plan as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
The best Medigap insurance can be found with the company that offers the lowest premium for the Plan you want . It 's really that simple . All Medigap Plans are standardized . This means each lettered plan has the same exact benefits from one insurance company to the next ... the only difference is the price . CMS has safety nets in place for Seniors , so if you have a Medigap Plan your bills are going to be paid according to the benefits of your Plan . If you have Medigap Plan F , all your Medicare approved charges will be covered and you do not have to pay any deductibles or coinsurance . Medigap Plan G works just like Plan F and covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible . With so many insurance companies available who sell Medigap insurance , it is wise to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . That way you can choose the best Medigap Plan that is right for you .
Medigap plans cover the gaps in cost that Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- does not cover . Medicare Part A & Part B only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medigap Plan is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- all or a portion of that other 20 % , depending on which Medigap plan you have -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it limits the expenses a senior can be exposed to by creating a very predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medigap plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It can be overwhelming research Medigap on your own . The best way to choose a Medigap Plan is to work with an independent agent . Trying to navigate the internet is time consuming and actually limits your Medigap choices . However you wish to proceed , make sure you look at a comparison chart and Outline of Coverage for the 10 standardized Medigap Plans . They each have varying benefits . You 'll want to determine which benefits are important to you and which Medigap plan best fits your budget . The two most popular plans are Medigap Plan F and Plan G. Medigap Plan F will cover all the gaps in Medicare coverage . You do n't have to meet any deductibles , co-pays or co-insurance . Medigap Plan G acts just like Plan F -- after you 've met the small $ 147 annual Part B deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F . If you would like assistance in comparing plans and premiums , please contact me . My personalized service is always free .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Does Medicare Assignment Work ?
Medicare assignment in many ways works just like traditional health insurance assignment.When you visit a doctor or use medical services you are assigning your reimbursement rights to the provider . Medicare providers that accept assignment are paid by Medicare . When a provider does not allow assignment Medicare pays direct to you for services rendered .
There is much misinformation spread about this topic . The former answer at least implies that a doctor can just `` decide '' whether to accept Medicare assignment or not . It is important to understand that this is only true if a doctor has signed a non-participating agreement with Medicare . Most doctors -LRB- approx . 97 % -RRB- are contracted with Medicare as `` participating physicians '' , and as such must accept Medicare assignment , i.e. the Medicare approved amount for the service as payment in full . Participating physicians are not permitted to bill any Part B excess charges . Next , the former example given is simply incorrect : `` if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . '' The truth is that if the doctor is contracted as `` non-participating '' with Medicare and chooses not to accept assignment , they are first penalized 5 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- $ 400 x 5 % = $ 20 penalty -RRB- . Medicare will only reimburse $ 380 for this example -LRB- $ 400 - $ 20 penalty -RRB- . The doctor can bill you up to 15 % of the $ 380 as an excess charge in this example , or $ 57 . In not accepting assignment , the doctor may bill/collect $ 437 -LRB- $ 380 Medicare reimbursement + $ 57 excess charge -RRB- . This gives the doctor the opportunity to receive $ 437 instead of the $ 400 Medicare assignment , which in effect is a 9.25 % increase in revenue . Non-Participating physicians can decide whether to accept Medicare assignment on a case by case basis , and often do accept assignment , because if they do not , Medicare reimburses the claim to the beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- , and the physician then must collect the reimbursement and the excess charge from the consumer in full . This adds administrative and collection costs that many non-Par physicians do not want to deal with . The former answer states that If you live in one of the states banning Part B excess charges , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . But the truth is that Part B excess charges are not a concern , let alone a major concern , regardless of what state you are living in . For the reasons stated , Part B excess charges are rarely billed . Ask any Medicare beneficiary when was the last time they received a claim payment directly from Medicare -LRB- required if doctor was non-Par and refused assignment -RRB- . You will be hard pressed to find anyone answering yes .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The Part B Excess Charge is the amount above what Medicare approves for a procedure or office visit . Providers can bill you for excess charges if they do not accept Medicare Assignment . Because the doctor does not accept Medicare Assignment , he or she is able to charge an additional amountthis is the Part B Excess Charge . The doctor , however , is limited to charging 15 % over the Medicare approved amount . To avoid excess charges it is important to understand Medicare Assignment . This term refers to providers who WILL accept full payment by Medicare . If a doctor does not accept Medicare Assignment , he or she IS allowed to bill you for Part B Excess Charges . To find out if your doctor accepts Medicare Assignment you can always call their office or visit Medicare.gov and locate the physician information . If you do n't like the idea of paying Part B excess charges , you can consider purchasing a Medicare Supplement plan to cover that expense . In 2014 , there are two plans -LRB- F , G -RRB- that have that benefit . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare assignment in many ways works just like traditional health insurance assignment.When you visit a doctor or use medical services you are assigning your reimbursement rights to the provider . Medicare providers that accept assignment are paid by Medicare . When a provider does not allow assignment Medicare pays direct to you for services rendered .
Medicare Part B excess charges happen when you use a medical provider that does not accept Medicare assignment . Almost all providers will accept assignment because they want to get paid quickly and paid by Medicare . If you use a provider that does not accept assignment they are allowed to bill an amount over and above the Medicare allowance . That allowance is capped by Medicare . Some Medicare supplement plans will cover those excess charges .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
There are actually two common but different ways to assign life insurance . The first way to assign is with assigning the beneficiary for a temporary purpose . An example would be a financial institution loaning a substantial amount of money may require a person to assign them as beneficiary until the loan is repaid . Once this loan is repaid the assignment of beneficiary would go back to the original beneficiary , unless specifically changed again by the policy owner . The second common practice of assignment of life insurance is to assign a new owner of a policy . This is most common with cash value life insurance which a parent or grandparent purchased on a minor child . A minor can not own a policy with financial decisions , so an adult , usually parent or grandparent , will be owner until the child becomes an adult . The assign is made from the parent or previous owner to the insured child as the new owner .
Medicare will cover a colonoscopy screening one every 2 years if you 're considered to be at high risk for colon cancer . If your doctor accepts assignment , Medicare would cover the screening at 100 % -LRB- you pay nothing -RRB- . If your doctor does not accept assignment , then Medicare will cover 80 % of the expenses . You would be responsible for the other 20 % and the part B deductible may apply.A Medigap plan F can cover the other 20 % of expenses and part B deductible if your doctor does n't accept assignment . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The pledge or assignment of all or some a life insurance policy might be made as collateral security . The policyowner has the right to do this . There are many scenarios and planning techniques in which assignments are made . To the extent that some amount of the death benefit was assigned to a third party , that party would receive that amount as a death benefit if death occurs during the existence of the agreement . Normally the assignment would be revocable meaning the policyowner can cancel the agreement at some point . But some estate planning methods involve irrevocable assignments . Policy assignments are also part of the process when a policyowner exchanges one life insurance policy with another . In order to ensure there is no gap in coverage during the process , an absolute assignment of the existing policy to the insurer that will issue the new policy is made . Completion of an exchange agreement with the insurer that will issue the new policy follows and then the new policy is issued before the old policy is surrendered .
The assignment of all or some a life insurance policy is often done as collateral security . The policy owner has the right to do this . There are many scenarios and planning techniques in which assignments are made . It occurs in split dollar arrangements and in situations involving indebtedness . To the extent that some amount of the death benefit was assigned to a third party , that party would receive that amount as a death benefit if death occurs during the existence of the agreement . Normally the assignment would be revocable meaning the policy owner can cancel the agreement at some point . But some estate planning methods involve irrevocable assignments . Policy assignments are also part of the process when a policy owner exchanges one life insurance policy with another . In order to ensure there is no gap in coverage during the process , an absolute assignment of the existing policy to the insurer that will issue the new policy is made . Completion of an exchange agreement with the insurer that will issue the new policy follows and then the new policy is issued before the old policy is surrendered .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not includeHPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not include HPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Mayo Clinic does take Medicare , however , Mayo Clinic does not accept assignment from Medicare for professional and physician services . Medicare does accept assignment for Mayo Clinic Hospital Facility charges . Therefore , if you are not receiving inpatient services , you will owe a small part of your payment to Mayo Clinic out of pocket .
Ill tell you one way they can : by making them the beneficiary on your policy . Its a common mistake , and it can be costly . When men and women go into business for themselves , they often take out a bank loan to jumpstart the enterprise . Many lending institutions require life insurance to be in force on the borrower . They simply do not want to have to chase the heirs or estate custodians in case their client unfortunately dies before the loan is paid up . The question is , how can you arrange for them to get only the amount that is due on the loan at the time of death ? You may take out $ 1 million loan initially , but seven years down the road you may owe only $ 750,000 . How do you prevent them from getting the entire million dollars of benefit ? One very effective way of accomplishing this is through the use of a collateral assignment . As soon as the policy is put into force , the owner signs an agreement signing over the benefit to the lender . But , the agreement is careful to stipulate that only the outstanding amount of the loan would be payable . This is how it would work : the estate of the insured files a claim . The insurance carrier sees from their file that a collateral assignment has been executed . They then contact the lender for proof of the outstanding amount . Once that proof is provided , they are sent a check . The beneficiary gets the rest . The lender gets only what they are due , as they should . But I think you can see the trouble that could be caused if you made the lender the beneficiary . They would get the entire amount of the benefit even if they are not owed that much ! The collateral assignment is a neat little tool that is not complicated and can be executed in a day . But it goes along way towards securing your life insurance benefit for both your creditors and your beneficiaries .
Medicare Part B typically covers 80 % of your medical necessary services performed by medical providers that are assigned to Medicare . Doctors assigned to Medicare agree to only charge what Medicare allows for a particular procedure . If you medical procedures are done by providers that are n't assigned to Medicare , then you could be responsible for up to an additional 15 % above what Medicare covers for a particular procedure . If you have Supplemental -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , the Plans F & G are the only two plans that cover that 15 % .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
Life insurance policies are often assigned for loan protection or to fund funerals , among other things . Collateral assignment still gives you some control in your policy , but allows a lender to repay your loan from your life insurance proceeds if you should pass away before the loan is paid off . Whatever does not go to your loan repayment , goes to the beneficiary of your choice . For funerals , the assignment may also collateral assignment , but if prepaying a funeral for Medicaid spend down , it must be irrevocable .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can Someone Have Two Health Insurance Policies ?
Technically , yes , you could . Though it would serve little practical purpose and be a really expensive proposition in this day and age . When you enroll in a health insurance plan there will always be a question asking if you will have other coverage in effect along with the policy you are applying for . This is so the two insurance carriers can coordinate their benefits among each other . In no case will your coverage with the combined insurance policies exceed 100 % of your covered expenses and it is illegal to make a profit off of having health insurance coverage . So , you would pay two full premiums for two separate major medical policies but , at best the secondary policy would only pay what was n't paid for by the primary policy . While I have n't seen or heard of it being tried , I would expect that a person enrolling for coverage through HealthCare.gov , especially a person who qualifies for a premium tax subsidy , would not be allowed to enroll in more than one plan by the way the computerized enrollment system is set up .
The percentage of life insurance claims denied would be less than 1 % . The reasons for denial are only a couple . First the most common reason for denialis a suicide which is committed within the first two years of the policy in force . Suicide is excluded within the first two years of practically every policy . This protects the insurance company from someone suicidal purchasing a policy while in this state of mind . Second is fraud committed within the first two years . If someone has a illness that would cause a prudent individual to seek medical attention and did not then passed away from this affliction within the first two years . The insurance company would consider this a misrepresentation of health on the application and deny the claim . In today 's information age this is getting more difficult for an individual to get away with .
Yes , when someone gets life insurance on someone else , the person who purchased the policy is the policy Owner . The other person whose life is being insured , is called the Insured . It is the Owner who makes the decisions about the policy , such as naming the beneficiary , which bank account to pay the premium from , etc. . Obviously , you would want everything to be above board if you were going to be the Insured in a policy owned by someone else . One reason someone might want to own a policy on someone else 's life is if they would suffer a great loss if that person died . E.g. . The Insured owed the Owner a great deal of money , and the life insurance policy would repay that debt if the borrower died . Or the Insured owned the home where the policy Owner was living , and that policy would enable the policy owner to purchase the home when the Insured person died . Unless there is a very close family tie , this type of insurable interest in actually required in order to take out a life insurance policy on someone else .
A life insurance policy could be denied for any of the following reasons : 1 -RRB- The applicant 's health was not controlled . This can be anything from someone with diabetes having an A1C over 10 , to someone with cancer having only months to live . 2 -RRB- The applicant 's health has not been stable for a certain length of time . This can range from someone who had very high blood pressure and only been on medication for one month , to someone with MS who has had a recent major exacerbation . 3 -RRB- The applicant is planning to have major medical testing or procedure done in the near future . In other words , if your doctor has scheduled a test to see if you have Parkinson 's , you will need to wait until after the test to apply . If you have gastric bypass surgery scheduled in two months , the insurance company will ask that you wait until after your surgery to apply . 4 -RRB- The applicant has had a recent bankruptcy that has not been discharged , has undergone recent drug or alcohol treatment , has had numerous traffic violations in the past year , or other non-health related risk factors . The above mostly relate to medically underwritten policies . There are simplified issue policies -LRB- that do not require an exam -RRB- and guaranteed issued policies -LRB- that do not have any requirements -RRB- that can be obtained when a medically underwritten policy will not work . Simplified and guaranteed issue policies do have restrictions on face amounts , you must be in a certain age range to get them , and they are not available in every state . Thus , some people do apply for simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies and get declined simply because they do not fit the age , or it is not offered in their state . This is most common for persons applying by mail or online . If you enlist the help of a good agent , you can avoid many declines by having proper guidance in the first place .
Yes , a person can have tow health insurance policies , but it rarely pays to do so . Since insurance is intended to protect someone from a possible catastrophic loss , it is not designed to allow someone to profit for being sick or ill . As such , if someone has two health plans , the insurance companies would `` co-ordinate '' benefits to determine which company is the primary payor . The other company would then provide benefits , based on the terms of your policy , until all bills are paid in full . Any `` unused '' benefits would not be paid to the policy holder .
Everything mentioned above is correct . You need to also consider when selecting Life Insurance for somebody that 's older the underwriting process you 'll have to go through . Depending on the benefit amount , some companies have a nonmedical underwriting process . That means mom and dad do n't have to give a blood or urine sample . You 'll see these type of plans on TV . Yet be aware of what you 're buying . Most of the TV Brands do not have guaranteed level premiums for life , or the death benefit is n't paid in full for the first two years . Allow me to explain in more detail . These plans are often called final expense Life Insurance . Generally speaking there or two ways the benefits are paid out . If your parents or in overall good health , without a major event like a heart attack or cancer in the last two years , they should be eligible for what 's called an immediate benefit . Once the policies approved the death benefit is available the next day . The other type is called a graded benefit -LRB- or call date modified benefit in some cases -RRB- . Again , generally speaking , most of these plans have a limited payout the first two years of policy is in force . Some pay a percentage of the death benefit while others refund all your premiums plus an interest rate . These plans are great if mom and dad are in poor health . Some applications have zero medical questions . I often see where someone is sold a graded benefit when they could have received a level benefit with a different carrier . Underwriting is the key factor ! If your parents are in good health they may want to consider a fully underwritten policy . That typically includes a small medical exam . Think of it this way , the deeper the carrier looks into somebody 's health , the better their rate for the same benefit will be . Then there 's the whole question of what type of insurance to get . Whole Life -LRB- which is what the Final expense plans are -RRB- , Term , or Universal Life . The Orman 's and Ramsey 's of the world will tell you to buy nothing else than term . . ever , ever , ever ... . I 'm not going to debate that now . Just going to say they are hurting a lot of people with such narrow , cookie cutter advice . ALL life insurance types have a time & place . If you have further questions ... Reach out . Honored to help ... - gravy .
Yes , unless it is an accidental death policy . That is why you buy life insurance , Life insurance will general cover a death by any means not specifically excluded in the policy . For example most life policies have a two year suicide clause , they would not pay for suicide within two years of taking out the policy . Most would not pay if a person is killed while committing a crime . Some will not pay for someone killed fighting in a war . There is a two year incontestability clause which allows the insurer to deny a claim if a client lies on an application and dies within two years . All of these are spelled out in your policy .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
For someone covered by two or more group health insurance policies , the term COB , short for coordination of benefits , would be used in such a scenario . Group insurance was designed to cover major medical expenses ; however , it was never intended to pay in excess of 100 % of incurred charges . For this reason , coordination of benefitswas established as a method by which two or more carriers or plans could coordinate their respective benefits so the total benefit paid does not exceed 100 % of the total allowable expenses incurred . In most states , thecoordination of benefitsregulations specifies how benefits are to be coordinated by insurance companies issuing group policies in the state . In most states , individual health insurance policies do not have to comply with thecoordination of benefitsrules . Thosepolicies may have special provisions in place if you have more than one policy . You should review your individual health insurance policy to see how it pays if other insurance is involved .
Yes , you can have two or more policies , as long as you qualify financially for the total amount of coverage . Some mixed families take out two policies , rather than have their biological children and stepchildren have to split the same policy proceeds . Or , they take two policies so their divorced spouse has a different policy than their current spouse . Those who own business policies may need to keep them separate from personal policies for tax reasons . Sometimes having two policies is better than one , because the death benefit will be covering two completely different types of needs . E.g. . You might want a small policy to cover your funeral expenses , which would necessitate some type of permanent insurance . But you might also want a larger policy to pay off your mortgage , and 10 year Term -LRB- which usually costs much less than Whole or Universal Life -RRB- may be a much more economical choice for that particular need .
Typically insurers will allow you to add licensed individuals such as : children , spouses , domestic partners , other residential drivers etc. . If you fail to add someone who should have been rated on the policy that can pose some significant issues . When in doubt contact your agent and ask him or her about what you have in mind . Insurers typically like to have persons who drive the vehicle added to the policy for two reasons 1 -RRB- it helps establish an adequate pricing level and 2 -RRB- it allows them opportunity to monitor their driving behavior . One other thing to consider is when you hand over the keys to someone else , you are generally creating permissive use . Make sure of two things , 1 -RRB- the person who will drive has a valid drivers license and 2 -RRB- they do not appear to be in any form impaired by drugs -LRB- illicit or prescription -RRB- or by alcohol .
There are only two reasons to buy life insurance . The first is that you owe money and the lender requires a policy . The second is that you love someone . There are thousands of applications of life insurance but this is the bottom line . If it isnt required or you dont love someone there isnt any reason to buy life insurance . If your death , premature or in old age , doesnt make a ripple on a pond , you dont need life insurance . However , if your death is going to cause a loss to someone you love buy all the life insurance that you can afford !
As I illustrated recently to a class of high school freshmen , that is really a complicated question but let me clarify full-coverage first . Insurance agents only use that term when someone else introduces the subject . We know that full-coverage does not mean that the insurance company will make everything right all the time . Policies have limits , claims are adjusted and there are a great many places where there could be misunderstandings . An insurance policy has two major sections , liability and property damage . Many people think that if they have coverage in both sections they have full-coverage . If they cause an accident and people are injured , they might well be sued . The liability portion of the policy will stand between them and the injured party until the judgments and expenses exceed the liability limits written in their policy . These limits can range from $ 15,000 to over $ 1 million . So if someone is injured and sues and wins a judgment in the amount of $ 50,000 , your full-coverage policy might not meet your needs and the court might be looking at your other assets to satisfy the judgment . A similar disagreement can arise with property damage . This is settled on actual cash value , unless you have a rare policy with agreed value coverage . There are two problems which present themselves . You might really love your little Ford Focus that you bought two years ago and when it is damaged disagree with the adjuster on the value of the car . When the car is inspected the adjuster may decide that the car can not be repaired economically . The adjusted value presented will probably be less than you expected because there is a deductible which will be taken out of the settlement . Again , your full-coverage policy may not cover you in the way that you want . However , you asked about cost and in California the cost is dependent on the year , make and model of the vehicle , where the vehicle is registered , the driving record of the members of the household , the annual mileage of the vehicle , and then the coverages that you select . Companies offer discounts and sometimes assess penalties based on driving histories , other types of coverage , the occupation of the principal operator and other factors . The answer to how much it costs is , it depends .
The answer has two distinct parts to it . Part One : You can only purchase life insurance on someone you have an `` insurable interest '' in . This means you have some financial interest in them continuing to live . Such as a spouse , a child , a business associate , or some relative with whom you may be in some manner financially associated with . Part Two : Not everyone can have life insurance , except for the `` Guaranteed '' type insurance , which is for relatively low amounts of death benefit , and a relatively high premium . This may come through a group plan or a general advertisement.For the other types of life insurance , your health will be checked , unless you are a member of a group doing open enrollment , where the premiums are averaged out among sick and healthy members . After a health check , the company will make an offer of what they will charge and what death benefit they will offer . You may not get what you hoped for . Your best bet is to do everything you can to make sure your health exam will find you in the best health possible . Do not lie . They will find out . The company with the lowest rate is not always the one with the best coverage . Keep the reputation of the company in mind . Always best to go with the best life insurance company you can find who will cover you . Gary Lane 949 797 2424 .
An important question in view of the growth in high deductible health plans as well as the growing number of health plan designs doing away with office visit and prescription drug copayments and making such services subject to the plan deductible and/or co-insurance . The trend is clearly for higher out-of-pocket health care expenses for many people . Properly designed GAP policies can help address many of potential medical out-of-pocket expenses a person might encounter . Poorly designed GAP policies can still leave the person with substantial out-of-pocket expenses . There are a wide variety of GAP policies currently available with more to come I am sure . The value and cost of a GAP policy will vary depending upon the type of coverage gap -LRB- s -RRB- you are trying to fill or minimize , the premium cost associated with the GAP policy , and what is covered under the GAP policy . Each individual will have to make a risk determination as to whether the amount of financial exposure is great enough and the probability of incurring covered claims is great enough to justify the GAP plan 's premium payment . Someone with office visit/urgent care and ER & prescription drug copays , a $ 1000 deductible and a $ 4000 out of-pocket maximum probably does n't need a GAP policy . On the other hand , someone with $ 6350 deductible and a two office visits/yr covered at a $ 50 copy - that person could probably use a GAP plan . Seek out an experienced , qualified health insurance broker to help you make the GAP policy decision and to find the GAP policy best suited to your needs if a GAP policy is an answer .
Unless someone has committed suicide in the first two years after getting their life insurance policy , or misrepresented their health information on their application AND their life insurance policy has been in effect under two years , their policy will pay the death benefit . There are very few situations where a life insurance policy will not pay out .
Yes , life insurance in force at the death of the life insured pays out the death benefit proceeds once proof of death has been submitted . The life insurer can not deny a claim unless due to either suicide in the first two policy years or a material misrepresentation in the first two years of the policy . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . Life insurance is something you need to qualify for in advance - the insured must be insurable , the owner must have an insurable interest , etc. . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in cases of fraud .
Since there are only two guarantees in life , death and taxes , as soon as possible . Most parents purchase on a child at birth for two reasons . One to cover funeral costs if the unthinkable happens and two , to protect the child 's insurability . If you do not have life insurance from childhood , the next time to purchase life insurance is when someone counts on you for either income or paying back a debt . Whether it is personal , such as loved ones like a spouse , partner or child , or a business partner that would lose financially if you were to die untimely , these are the situations to purchase good life insurance . The younger and healthier you are the better rate you can lock in for many years or the rest of your life . However , it is better late than never . Lack of life insurance can cause a whole host of financial problems for those left behind .
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
If during the first two years of a life insurance policy , the life insurance company will check to see if the overdose was due to suicide . They will also check to see if there was a drug problem that was not noted on the application . If past drug history was lied about or omitted , the policy will not pay the claim within the first two years of the policy . If the application was filled out honestly : 1 -RRB- If the drug overdose was accidental , the policy will pay , even within the first two years . 2 -RRB- If the drug overdose was suicide after two years , the policy will pay . 3 -RRB- If the drug overdose was due to a drug habit picked up after getting the policy , the policy will pay . 4 -RRB- If the drug overdose was due to mental illness contracted after getting the policy , the policy will pay . There may be some caveats in some policies , but the above is how life insurance generally works . If you disclosed everything and your life changes later , the policy pays with the exception of suicide in the first two years .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Needs To Buy Long Term Care Insurance ?
Those who need to buy long term care insurance are those who have assets that they wish to leave their heirs , such as farms , substantial investments , or commercial real estate . However , those with great wealth may wish to fund their own long term care . Some people buy long term care to keep their families from having to worry about them , or to ensure that they will have a say in the type of care they get .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
In all honesty , Long Term Care Insurance is not important for everyone . If you have very few assets and low income , you may sacrifice to pay Long Term Care premiums for extended care that may or may not be needed , and that Medicaid could cover if needed . If being able to choose your own place and type of extended care is important to you , then Long Term Care Insurance is a great thing to own even with low assets , as long as you can afford to pay the premiums . Long Term Care Insurance is most important for those who have an estate to protect . If you have saved up to pass an inheritance to your loved ones , or wish to pass a business to a successor , your intentions could be jeopardized if you were to to need care for an extended period of time . Long Term Care can pay that for you and allow your estate to remain untouched .
Long term care insurance is not worth the cost if it causes you to cut back on groceries or medication or other essentials needed for a healthy and happy life . If you have very little savings , assets or investments , long term care insurance may also not be worth the cost . If you can afford it , you might want to buy long term care insurance for the options it offers you for your care . However , you would not need it to protect your assets if you do not have assets to protect . Long term care insurance IS worth the cost for those who have a lot to lose if they would have to pay expensive nursing home , assisted living , in home , or other care costs for an extended period of time . It also is worth the cost for those who have strong feelings about being able to pay for the type of care they want , rather than rely on where Medicaid allows .
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Homeowners Insurance Cover Shingles Blown Off Roof ?
A roof has a shorter life span than the rest of the house . As a result many insurance companies do not provide replacement coverage for a roof . Instead they determine the life of the roof and repair the roof under the policy using the cash value of the roof . If a $ 15000 roof has $ 5000 of damage and is midway through its life , you could expect a settlement that would help repair your roof but would not replace the roof .
That is a great question ! Check with your agent to be certain , but you should be covered for the repairs . How bad was the damage ? If it 's just a few shingles , and the estimate is less than your deductible amount , you are wiser to not file a claim , as you 'd end up paying for it anyway , and you will spare yourself the chance of an increased premium as a result of the filed claim . You also may have problems because of the reason for the lost shingles . Hurricane damage , or tornado damage may not be covered with out a rider , where you live . Best bet ? Get a repair estimate , compare it to your deductible amount , and proceed from there . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
It is always best to talk with your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy , but generally speaking , wind damage is a covered peril in most Homeowners policies . Now , that having been said , in coastal areas , where states allow , insurance companies can apply coverage limitations or specific deductibles for damage caused by wind .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
Shingles is an awful disease and often adults will get Shingles later in life . The recovery time is longer than you expect and it is certainly a disease to avoid if possible . About half of the population gets Shingles before they turn 80 . Homeowner 's insurance , of course , does not pay for it . However , if you are referring to shingles on your roof ... yes , if part of an approved claim , they are covered ! Obviously , if your roof is damaged in a tornado , you may need new shingles . Not the disease though .
Keep in mind that your homeowners policy is not a maintenance policy . Similar to your auto insurance not providing coverage for new tires or new brakes , your homeowners insurance policy will not pay for a new roof if the roof is worn out and has just deteriorated over time . The life of a typical composition shingle roof is anywhere from 20 - 30 years and needs to be replaced if it is falling apart due to wear and tear . This is very different from a claim scenario where your roof sustains sudden and accidental damage from a storm -LRB- i.e. wind or hail -RRB- . If this is the case , your roof can be covered under your homeowners insurance and depending on the extent of the damage could potentially be covered for replacement . Everyone should consult their agent to check the language of the policy and weigh all options because when you submit a claim it is normal for your rates to go up because of a loss of discount and / or a rating surcharge . -- @MooneyInsurance
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
homeowner 's insurance will pay for a new roof if the damage is a result of a covered claim . For example , if a tornado causes damage to the point where your roof needs replacing , it will be covered . If a few shingles are damaged and they can be replaced instead of an entire roof , that will also be covered .
Yes and no ! The typical multi-peril homeowners policy water covers damage caused by rain under specific circumstances such as water windblown thru the roof shingles or a hole in the wall or roof caused by lightning . However if it rains to the degree that water collects on the ground and enter your home thru doors or windows , the homeowners policy does not cover it . That would require a flood insurance policy . If it rains and your sump pump fails and water fills your basement , most homeowners policies will NOT cover the loss , though many companies offers optional sump pump failure coverage . Consult your insurance professional for the details that apply in your state .
Homeowners insurance typically does cover your roof , whether comprised of common asphalt shingles or another material . However , policies may differ in HOW your roof is covered . Some policies cover the roof for actual cash value -LRB- market value - depreciation = actual cash value -RRB- . While others have a guaranteed amount of coverage . Most people do not know that their deductible may be higher for wind orhail damage claims -LRB- the most common perilswhich lead to an insurance claim on a roof -RRB- . Policies typically have an option of a flat deductible , meaningthe same deductible is paid regardless of the type of claim . As an example let 's say you have a flat $ 500 deductible . Whether there is afire claim or wind damage claim , you pay $ 500 for your deductible . Many policies have the option , and some even require , a higher deductible for wind/hail claims.For example , you may have a $ 1,000 deductible for wind/hail and $ 500 deductible AOP -LRB- all other perils -RRB- . Want to know what coverage you have ? Check out your policy or ask your agent today !
Typically there is going to have to be a claim in order to have a roof repaired or replaced . In most states the roof is covered on a replacement cost basis , however , many states are moving to an ACV , or actual cash value , approach to paying roof claims due to the high number of fraudulent claims arising from hail damage . You need to check with your agent about your policy to see if you have the replacement option with special coverage as the reason for loss . Then a claims adjuster will need to determine what was the cause of the damage . They will also determine if the roof is repairable with like kind and quality replacement shingles . As with almost every part of insurance wear and tear is excluded . Maintenance and replacement are the homeowners responsibility . Insurance is for unexpected losses .
The best answer to this question : `` It depends . '' First , you have to determine the age of your roof . If it is going on 20 + years then you are going to face an uphill battle . The reason for this is if a roof is done well , then you can probably expect 15-20 years out of it . If it is 20 + years then most insurance companies are going to argue that the cause of loss is `` wear and tear , '' which is universally not going to be covered -LRB- that is more of a warranty issue -RRB- . Second , if your roof is newer , you have to then look at the cause of loss and the type of Homeowners form you have . If it is a HO-3 , then everything is covered unless it is excluded . What this means is it is a special form and all losses are covered unless there is a specific exclusion in your policy . If you have an HO-2 or HO-1 you will have less coverage because the causes of loss are specified in the policy . So , if your shingle was somewhat new and it was damaged due to a reason listed in your policy you will have coverage .
Yes . Unless specifically stated in your policy , your roof will have the same coverage as the rest of your home . Because claims involving a roof are very common , an insurance company will pay close attention to the characteristics of your roof . If you have any existing damage , wood shake shingles , or a flat roof you will have a more difficult time finding a company to insure you .
If the leak is simply caused by wear and tear then the leak would not be covered since wear and tear and/or deterioration are not covered perils . If say for example a storm blew through blowing shingles off the roof and causing a leak this would be a covered peril .
Roofing and or siding shingles are considered to be a part of the over all structure of a home and therefore , if damaged or destroyed by a covered peril in your policy , would be included in that coverage . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy as well as any limitations to gain the best understanding of what is and is not covered and to what extent . Naturally , any covered loss will be settled subject to your policy deductible along with all other specifics of the policy terms . Be sure to find out if your policy includes a replacement guarantee loss settlement in that conversation . Bundled and stored shingles would be considered Personal Property and thus covered under that portion of your policy as opposed to the dwelling portion .
Homeowners insurance does not cover defective workmanship . Now in the case of your shingles if you had a wind storm for example and water leaked in your home the insurance company would pay for the damage to the dwelling . Upon discovery you have faulty shingles , you the homeowner , would be obligated to replace those shingles , not the insurance company . In pretty much every case I have seen if the shingles are not replaced you would be non renewed by the insurance compnay as the insurance company does not want to pay another claim due to faulty shingles .
Medical care has a price . In the open market it is fixed by consumers who want a service and medical personnel who can deliver the service . The problem occurs when someone needs the treatment but can not or will not pay the price for the service . I say , Will not because every decision about spending is discretionary . Should society as a whole bear the responsibility for the medical care for every resident ? Should the nature of that care be regulated ? Should the source of funding be general ? Those are the most pressing questions when considering a universal health care system . Ultimately in a universal health care system there is a specified list of services and a funding mechanism that is not based upon need for medical services . You may need a procedure that isnt covered in the program . At the same time you might consider another procedure immoral or frivolous . Who is going to decide ? The idea of universal health care sounds very good until you understand that some medical services will probably not be covered . In the USSR dental hygiene consisted of inserting a fluorescent tube into the patients mouth and surgery was routinely conducted in a super-cold environment because anesthesia was not readily available . In that case , most Americans would consider the health care to be inadequate . However , it was available to all and at little or no direct cost to the consumer . Under most regimes universal health care becomes rationed health care . The best example is the army under war time conditions . It is called triage but it means that you treat those with the greatest likelihood of recovery before treating soldiers with graver injuries . While it might be the best utilization of manpower , the soldier with his leg blown off , might not like the wait and a narcotic shot is not going to make his family happy . The issue of who is going to pay for the universal health care system is the most sensitive . No one wants to see others in need . By the same token no one wants to pay the high bill for medical treatment . If the universal care is funded by general funds from taxes it will always be a political football . If it is paid by premiums paid by individuals there will always be a need to assist those unable to pay the premium . The problem really boils down to our expectations of treatment level , the availability and cost of that treatment and who is going to pay the price . Yes , it sounds like a great idea but it has many difficulties and when it is expected then the society will start to question the need for universal flat screen TVs , micro-wave ovens and wall-to-wall carpets . There really isnt an end unless you look at the Soviet Union and see how it ended .
If you are referring to the roof then yes home would cover shingles for the perils of the policy . Keep in mind , wear and tear -LRB- age and deterioration -RRB- are not perils of a homeowners insurance policy . Coverage would be such things as fire , wind -LRB- assuming there is not wind exclusion -RRB- falling objects , collapse due to snow . If you have a specific question or situation please re-post the question or contact your local agent for clarification .
Typically , auto insurance policies are designed to cover potential liability , property damage , accidents when your car is damaged and comprehensive claims such as fire , theft , vandalism etc. . . A blown engine is caused by wear and tear -LRB- the vast majority of the time -RRB- and unfortunately would not be covered by a car insurance policy . A `` maintenance '' policy may offer some type of benefits -LRB- subject to conditions and exclusions of the contract -RRB- , but not your personal vehicle policy . Do n't forget to delete your car from your policy is the car can not and will not be driven . It 's possible you may wish to keep the comprehensive coverage in force , depending upon the circumstances .
A typical auto insurance policy will not cover a blown engine in a vehicle . If you have a maintenance or repair endorsement on your policy , then you may have some coverage . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
end question
start question
annuities
How To Avoid Paying Taxes On Annuities ?
Deferred or single premium immediate annuity policies only delay taxes , they dont avoid taxes . Even artful tactics in ownership with trusts or split annuitant strategies ultimately pay taxes . You could give an annuity to a charity outright and you would n't pay taxes , but youd have no asset either . Annuities only stall the inevitable tax event . But they are advantages to deferring taxation and that is where the planning begins .
You can generally withdraw money from an annuity at any time . However , you may be subject to a penalty and taxes . Annuities are generally meant to be long-term or at least a specified term such as 5 , 7 , 10 or more years . Each contact will have rules on how much you can take out annually without any penalty . Often it is 10 percent per year , after the first year . If you withdraw above the penalty-free withdrawal amount , you will pay a penalty . This annuity schedule is part of the contract and if you have questions about how to interpret , contact the agent that sold you the annuity or another qualified agent . Taxes will likely apply to any withdrawals at your ordinary income tax rate for that year . Also remember that if your annuity is a non-qualified account -LRB- not a Roth or IRA -RRB- and you withdraw prior to age 59 1/2 , the first dollars you withdraw will be considered your gain and be taxed at whatever your ordinary tax rate is for that year . There are ways to avoid the penalty -LRB- not the tax -RRB- for the withdrawal under section 72 -LRB- t -RRB- of the IRS code but you would have to agree to take level distributions until age 59 1/2 or for 5 years , whichever is longer . If you do n't follow this rule , you will be subject to a 10 % penalty going back to when you started early withdrawals from your annuity . Annuities can be a great product when the `` fit '' is correct . Your agent should make sure it is suitable upfront for your specific needs so you can avoid getting into an early withdrawal situation .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
While the answer is - `` YES '' , you can combine annuities - it is important to bear in mind that some annuities have different tax treatment than others . My advice is to only combine annuity money of a similar nature with that of another . For example , an IRA -LRB- individual Retirement Account -RRB- provides a deduction on the IRS 1040 against income . Because of this feature and tax benefit , all money coming out of an IRA , both interest and basis , are taxed as income upon distribution . In other words , because of the tax deduction , distributions from an IRA are taxed as if all the money coming from the account is being taxed for the first time . An ordinary tax qualified annuity , a non-IRA annuity , incurs taxation only on the gain at the time of distribution . This exclusion formula recognizes that some of the money deposited was already taxed as ordinary income when you first earned it and this money will not be taxed again at distribution . That is why I suggest honoring the character of the money and keeping IRA 's with IRA 's , etc. . This simple rule of thumb will help relieve you of explaining years later the source or the money and help you argue successfully that some money should not be taxed . Who among us will remember 30-40 years hence how these accounts were merged ? There are a whole other set of rules for conversions and methods to avoid taxation prior to annuitization and the beginning of the payout period of your annuities . This answer covers general theory only on the idea you want to minimize taxation to the largest extent possible .
Broad questions deserve broad answers and so the question as to taxation of life insurance benefits is this : Generally , life insurance benefits are paid free of income taxation when paid to individuals . But , there are exceptions and possible complications to this simple answer . One big potential problem is when the decedent is also the policy owner and the life insurance gets added to the value of an estate and then taxed in that way . The IRS looks for incidents of ownership up three years prior to the death . Also , life insurance paid to an estate that is subject to other forms of taxation may result in the life benefits being taxed as well so it is n't always a good idea to pay life benefits to an estate . Also , life insurance after the first $ 50,000 is taxed when premium was paid by the employer . Life insurance you buy separately under group options are generally not taxed as income -LRB- provided all the rules are followed - see above -RRB- . Also , generally when a corporation pays the premium and the benefits are payable to the corporation , they ca n't write off the premium and collect the benefit free of income taxation . Under current law life insurance proceeds are only excludable up to the amounts of premium paid by the corpo in following with laws placed on the books in 2006 . There is a whole host of rules that must be followed to avoid taxation but it is possible that life insurance can be paid to a corporation and avoid taxation . While most of us will not be subject to taxation on the life insurance benefit it pays to understand how these benefits become taxable . Then , it is reasonably easy to avoid these pitfalls . Do n't also overlook the advice of a good agent and avoid the use of life insurance trusts to make sure the money moves to the beneficiary without taxation to the largest extent possible .
Withdrawing money from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- can be quite complicated and could be quite expensive . Since your employer has established the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the plan documents that govern your plan are in his office . The first thing to find out is whether in service withdrawals are allowed by the plan . Often there will be allowed withdrawals but the withdrawal must meet certain conditions . It is important to determine if you have the right to withdraw money from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- if you are still an employee . The rules also change if you leave your employer , whether voluntarily or involuntarily . You will probably find that your access to the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is much greater if you have left your job . If your employer is contributing to your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- there is probably a vesting schedule that is a part of the plan documents . The vesting schedule tells you the percentage of the employers contribution that is actually yours . Normally these vesting schedules run out several years so money that is received by the account may not actually be yours for a number of years . Your deposits will remain yours . These are the employers contributions that have a vesting schedule . If the money in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- has been deferred from current income tax you will be responsible to pay income tax as ordinary income in the year that you receive the money . If the money is in a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the withdrawal will be treated as a return of your contribution until you exhaust you basis -LRB- the total amount that you contributed . -RRB- The next major issue is your age . The rules vary a great deal if you are younger than fifty-nine and a half years old . If money can be withdrawn from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and you are younger than fifty-nine and a half years old you will be subject . Generally speaking withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- prior to age fifty-nine and a half are also treated to a special penalty tax of ten per cent . This is changed in addition to the ordinary income tax on the distribution . You can not avoid paying income tax on the money received but there are ways to avoid paying the ten per cent penalty tax . There are several general reasons . The first reason is if the amount is being withdrawn because the participant has died . A beneficiary will receive all of the distributions of the inherited 401 -LRB- k -RRB- free of the penalty tax . This can become complicated if the beneficiary is a spouse , please see a retirement income adviser or competent tax advisor prior to finalizing a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to a spouse . Another circumstance under which money can be taken from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- without paying the penalty tax is if the money is need due to the disability of the participant . This can also be true if money is needed to pay deductible medial expense . There is also a method of withdrawing money that can avoid the penalty tax . This can be quite complicated but the gist is to take the money in substantially equal period payments . If you think about a retirement annuity you will understand this concept . The payments should be designed to cover the lifetime of the participant . It is necessary for the participant to leave employment to use this technique . The computations for these payments are complicated but there are advisors who can help you should this be necessary . It is important to note that the penalty tax is only applicable until you reach age fifty-nine and half and the payments under this plan do not need to be continued after that point . Other retirement programs have additional exceptions that are more liberal than a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- IRAs , SEPs and SIMPLEs allow a $ 10,000 exemption to first-time homebuyers -LRB- this means anyone who is purchasing a home and hasnt owned a home for two years . -RRB- These plays also provide exceptions for higher education expenses -LRB- these must be taken in the year they are incurred , not the year that they are paid . -RRB- These plans offer exceptions for health insurance premiums for the unemployed . There is also a special rule for participants who are separating from their company and are more than fifty-five years old . There are ways to avoid the penalty tax but this requires careful tax planning .
Deferred or single premium immediate annuity policies only delay taxes , they dont avoid taxes . Even artful tactics in ownership with trusts or split annuitant strategies ultimately pay taxes . You could give an annuity to a charity outright and you would n't pay taxes , but youd have no asset either . Annuities only stall the inevitable tax event . But they are advantages to deferring taxation and that is where the planning begins .
When discussing the topic of taxes always consultant your account . However , the basic rule of thumb with life insurance goes like this . A death benefit set up properly by your agent should not be taxed . On term life insurance there is no cash value so the only benefit is the death benefit . On permanent life insurance plans such as whole life and universal life insurance , these plans do build a cash value that does earn interest . However , this is tax deferred interest , meaning as long as the plan is in force there is no tax on gains . When you withdraw funds from the cash value , you will have two options with two different tax consequences . The first is if you cancel or lapse the policy and take the cash value , then yes , these proceeds or interest are taxed as income . However , if you borrow from your own cash value , then the IRS sees this as a loan and the funds are now tax free . I recommend speaking to your agent or advisor to avoid a costly mistake . The second loan aspect would almost always be preferred over cancellation to avoid taxes .
How are annuity gains taxed ? Well , depending on how you funded the annuity and how you choose to distribute from the annuity the answer and be part of the distribution to all of the distribution . If you use qualified money to fund your annuity , you 've skipped paying taxes on those funds . This means when you have the funds distributed the entire amount is taxable . If you paid taxes on the money used to fund the annuity , you only pay taxes on the gains liquidated . The distribution is basically split in half for tax purposes . One thing as you consider distribution from your annuity . . only the money actually taken out is taxed , so taking funds out on a regular basis means you only pay taxes on what comes out of the policy .
Let me add a few other cases to the previous answer . While as a general rule life insurance death benefits are not taxable , there are a few more cases that can be taxable . Not only are life insurance death benefits counted as an asset for Federal Estate Tax , it is also counted for any equivalent state tax . Many states have limits lower than federal limits and may become subject to state taxation should the entire value of the estate exceed the state exemption . Also , it is important to avoid the Goodman Triangle . There are three parties involved in a life insurance contract , besides the insurance company . There is the insured , the person being covered , the owner , the person who controls the policy and typically pays the premium , and the beneficiary , the person named to receive the death benefit . It is important that at least two of these be in common to avoid Federal Income Tax . That means the owner should be either the insured or the beneficiary . To be safe , work with an insurance professional who is familiar with these rules to help you avoid problems . Finally , should you be concerned that the benefit will be taxable it would be wise to consult with a tax professional who is familiar with both Federal rules and the rules of your state .
The whole idea of a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is that you defer taxation on the deposit and the earnings of the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- until a later date . The assumption is that you will be avoiding a high tax now for a low tax later . The irony is that is not always the case . The IRS will not only tax your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- but they will force you to take withdrawals at a predetermined rate after you reach seventy and a half years of age , unless you are still working . While you can not avoid paying the tax , there are schemes that would allow you to take the Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMD -RRB- each year and hopefully preserve the money in the fund . However , when you die , your beneficiaries will have the privilege of paying the taxes on the money .
Annuities can be put into a trust but why ? The purpose of a trust is to avoid probate . Annuities already avoid probate . There are only two reasons I would ever put an annuity into a trust is 1 . if the trust is Irrevocable and the owner has an estate tax problem . Secondly , if the owner is worried that their is going to be a dispute among the beneficiaries .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
As a physician you are most likely earning a fair income and want to be sure to minimize your taxes . The government would like to take most of your money and that of your heirs , but there are some very specific ways to avoid much of that government taking . New York Life allows me to provide you with their Whole Life Insurance , at elevated face amounts , due to your elevated income . With this Whole Life Insurance , you can be certain that your family and other heirs will receive their benefits completely tax free . New York Life will allow you to take out substantial amounts of life insurance , paying a premium which will build up over the years , while accruing interest that is tax deferred to you and tax free to your beneficiary when you die . You can borrow against this growing fund when you wish , and not pay taxes on that money if you decide not to pay it back , but instead allow it to lower the death benefit for the loan . You can also repay it and increase the death benefit as though no loan had been taken . While constantly growing , your beneficiary will be taking your large estate in life insurance , paid by your premium payments , take free to the beneficiary , while passing your estate tax free at up to $ 14,500 per year in tax free premium payments . If your estate is even higher , we can equip you with tax sheltered annuities which can pay you for the rest of your life . Also of note are our Long Term Care Benefits , which you can protect your entire estate with by ensuring you never have to pay for such long term care or be a burden on your family . In short , as your New York Life Agent , I can provide you with a variety of very suitable choices from which to protect your assets and your family , while keeping the tax agents far from your door .
In order to prepare for a life insurance health exam , there are a number of things to do and not do . You want your health exam to to be as good as it can be to in order to receive the best rates possible and avoid additional tests , Start with a good night 's sleep before the exam and do not do any heavy exercise for 24 hours before , You may be required to fast for 12 hours if a blood test is being done . Regardless avoid food and drink -LRB- except water -RRB- for 2 hours prior . Drinking water before the exam is a good idea to provide a urine specimen . Avoid caffeine for several hours and alcoholic beverages for at least 8 hours before the exam . If you smoke , avoid smoking for at least 1 hour before the exam . Continue taking any prescription medicines and bring them to the exam for reference . If you are taking over-the-counter medicines , try and avoid them for 24 hours prior to your exam . Inform the examiner if you do take one and why you did . Abnormal tests can result if you are ill or under stress at the time of the exam . If you are unable to reschedule , be sure and inform the examiner . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
That is a great question ! Roth IRA 's are very withdrawal friendly , compared to other retirement plans . Simply put , your contributions can be withdrawn at any time without being taxed , as you paid the tax on those contributions before making them.Withdrawing your contributions is no different than taking it out of your savings account . It 's not income to take back your deposit . Your earnings , however , can be taxed under certain circumstances . To avoid them , your plan must be open for at least five years , and you must be at least 59 1/2 years of age . But ... even then there are reasons that you can pull earnings without being taxed - first time home buying , medical emergency payments , and qualified education expenses would not be taxed . Like I said , this is a very withdrawal friendly investment vehicle . So to recap : contributions can be taken tax free at any time . Earnings after 5 years , and if you are over 59 1/2 , unless it 's for a qualified expense . Remember that the purpose of your Roth is to generate earnings , and any withdrawal of funds from it early will have a very serious impact on that growth , so should be avoided if possible . This was a great question , thanks for asking it !
The only reason to try to avoid nicotine detection in your lab results is in order to pay a lower premium for your insurance than you actually qualify for . People buy life insurance in order to have the peace of mind that their loved ones will not face unnecessary financial burdens upon their death . By not being truthful on your life insurance application you potentially give the insurance company a basis to deny paying the claim on your policy . Given that possibility , you wo n't have peace of mind . You should not try to avoid paying the proper premium for your life insurance unless you want to give the life insurance company a reason to avoid paying a claim .
Cash value life insurance gains are taxable at time of surrender of your life insurance policy . The amount you paid in with your premiums was paid with post tax dollars and not subject to tax . As Gary stated , the best way to avoid these taxes on your cash value gains is to borrow against the value and use your money tax free . The policy loan interest rate will be minimal compared to the rate of the taxes you will owe against your gains . This option as keeps your face amount death benefit in force until the cash value is depleted to a certain point , which by the way is still growing inside the plan . I advise you to call your agent or the insurance company to discuss your options to avoid unnecessary taxation .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover CBT ?
I am assuming when you say CBT you are referring to Cognitive Behavioral Therapy which most of the companies provide reimbrusement for which means you will have to pay the bill and then submit the bill to the insurance company unless the therapist agrees to bill the insurance for you . Have you found this coverage in your policy ? Have you called the `` customer serivice '' number and ask them ?
I am assuming when you say CBT you are referring to Cognitive Behavioral Therapy which most of the companies provide reimbrusement for which means you will have to pay the bill and then submit the bill to the insurance company unless the therapist agrees to bill the insurance for you . Have you found this coverage in your policy ? Have you called the `` customer serivice '' number and ask them ?
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Medigap is a supplemental health insurance policy that can be purchased to go along with Medicare Part A and Part B . It is used to cover the costs that Medicare does not cover . Medigap does not fit in with Medicaid as Medicaid covers all medical costs and does not have the `` gaps '' of coverage that Medicare does .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not includeHPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not include HPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Interesting question . Makes me wonder if the above answers address what you meant to ask . So the points covered above are mostly what term life insurance does cover . What term life insurance does NOT cover is the risk of death after so many years as specified in the contract . Hence the `` Term '' In the name . Also term insurance ca n't be purchased for a person of 80 or the latest 85 years of age . Term insurance has no cash value so it does n't `` cover '' the need for a guaranteed tax-free growth of wealth like a Whole Life Insurance can . Term insurance ca n't `` cover '' the need for retirement income supplement like Whole Life can . As mentioned above no insurance including Term will cover suicide in the first two years of the policy . And of course also as mentioned above there is a contestability period with all life insurance to mitigate deliberate misinformation in order to obtain a policy . If fraud is proved on a claim within the contestability period the claim will be denied .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Theft On Vacation ?
Most renters policies provide for a percentage of your personal property to be covered away from your residence . In most cases a limit of 10 % of the personal property limit applies . If you suffer a loss to your property while away from the residence that limit will apply and a claim will be adjusted subject to the deductible . The property that you left behind will be covered whether you are home or not .
It is always best to discuss the terms and conditions of your policy with your Insurance Professional , but you will find that your policy will more than likely include extended coverage for your personal belongings outside your home . The coverage may be limited in a couple of ways , namely by capping the total amount to 10 % of your stated personal property amount . So if you have $ 50,000 of stated personal property on your policy , your coverage would be limited to $ 5,000 . Further , some policies include specific amounts or `` inside limits '' for certain categories of property . Things like jewelry , fire arms , photographic equipment and the like may be limited to a maximum settlement amount . Remember too that any loss settlement is subject to your policy deductible .
Renters insurance covers the theft of things inside your vehicle , as that is personal property not car insurance . Renters insurance would not cover the car itself , that is car insurance . Also , renters insurance travels with you , so like on vacation or a cruise and some of your personal items are stolen .
Talk to your Insurance professional , but in most cases , modern Renters Insurance Policies do include theft as a covered peril , yes . Now , there may be policy limits included that you need to know about . In some cases , companies can settle covered theft losses on certain things , like camera equipment for example , based upon a stated `` inside limit '' listed on your policy 's declaration sheet . Further , your personal property may be covered outside your home -LRB- while on vacation or in your car as two examples -RRB- but only up to a stated maximum of 10 % of the total Personal Property coverage amount .
Renters insurance covers three primary areas . First is Personal Property coverage . This portion of the policy covers all of your personal belongings from the peril of loss , theft or damage anywhere in the world . The loss does not have to occur at the location named in the policy for the loss to be covered . Second is Personal Liability coverage . This portion of the policy covers the insured in the event they are found personally liable for damage or injury to another person or their property . Again , this coverage applies wherever the insured is , it does not have to occur at the property address listed on the policy document . Finally , the policy covers for Loss of Use . With this portion of the policy , the insured is covered in the event they are required to temporarily vacate their residence . This coverage pays the increase in monthly living expense over what they typically pay each month for rent , up to the policy limits . In addition , riders can be attached to the policy to cover higher value items , collectibles , firearms , jewelry , artwork and etc. .
Unless your policy has a theft exclusion your personal items that are stolen while on vacation would be covered . Certain items may have coverage limits but the same would be true if you were at home . Of course any claim paid out would be minus the deductible on your policy .
I agree with the coverage part of answer one , however , if your renters insurance is only $ 10 a month I would question how much coverage you are actually getting . Why pay for something that will not protect you when something actually does happen ? Questions to ask your agent are : what they are basing their recommended coverage amount on ; if your property is covered only if it is inside your home -LRB- some companies offer world wide protection - if you 're on vacation and the airline loses your luggage for instance -RRB- ; how any valuable items such as jewelry or art , are protected - they should be scheduled on your renters policy otherwise they are only protected up to certain limits . And yes definitely look into bundling renters and auto for an additional discount !
If you 're insured with a reputable company and a good agent , your renters policy should include theft . All a renters policy is is a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It 's there to cover your stuff and your liability . It 's rare , but there are companies that offer coverage that may not include theft . This coverage form is called `` Basic Form '' and it will not cover theft . Never , never , never accept a policy written on a basic form for your renters coverage . The most common form is Broad Form , and it will cover theft . Most companies and agents will use this when writing your renters policy . Do n't accept anything less .
Renter insurance makes a lot of sense . If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle . Yes it makes sense to buy renters insurance .
Time shares running as short term vacation rentals should have some sort of commercial liability on them . There is a great company CBIZ Vacation Rental Insurance Insuring these types of vacation rentals all over the US . I used to work for them and can still help if you are in AZ or WY . But all other states should contact them directly .
-- > Normal 0 Renters -LRB- Tenant/Homeowners -RRB- Insurance policies will usually cover your personal property anywhere in the world . Of course , most tenant / homeowner policies also provide coverage on a named peril basis and theft is usually a specifically defined covered peril . So , in a general sense , renters policies should cover theft of your covered personal property while it is away from your home subject to the policys exclusions and limitations . Common limitations include : no coverage for theft from a dwelling under construction -LRB- often can be added -RRB- , theft from another residence you own or rent unless you are temporarily residing there , theft from the part of a residence you rent to someone , theft of boats , their equipment , trailers or campers , etc. .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
If you own your house you need a homeowners policy because Renters insurance does not cover the dwelling . Part of your homeowners policy is personal property coverage which covers your personal belongings any where in the world . Coverage is limited to 10 % of your personal property limit if a claim occurs away from your home . For example , you are traveling on vacation and your luggage is stolen . Your house is insured for $ 500,000 and you have $ 350,000 personal property coverage . You will have coverage up to $ 35,000 for your stolen luggage .
Medicare does not cover `` dental '' . While `` Medicare Advantage '' covers some `` preventive care procedures it does not cover extensive dental procedures . There are `` dental '' policies available the coverage is usually limited to $ 1000 per year . In most cases dental maintenance is best planned to have preventive cleaning done each year plus any required `` dental filling ' each year but then if you need more extreme procedures you will probably spend a chunk of your vacation funds in the dental office
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
You can but there would have to be some reason . For example , if you reside in one state , but have a vacation home in another , and you want to avoid the wear and tear on one of your primary cars , you may want to register a car in the state in which your vacation property is located . In that case , due to states registration regulations which require proof of insurance issued in the registering state , you would obtain coverage for that car in that state .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
Renters insurance does not cover vehicle theft . Vehicle theft would be covered under your auto insurance policy provided you carry comprehensive coverage on your auto policy . However , if you have a renters insurance policy and some of your personal items were in the vehicle that was stolen they may be covered by your renters policy as long as the items are personal items and not part of the vehicle .
end question
start question
health-insurance
I 'm Pregnant Can I Get Health Insurance ?
Yes . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you can not be declined for health insurance for any medical-related conditions . Each policy is required to cover 10 essential health benefits - one of these essential benefits is maternity care . If you need assistance in determining which health plan is right for you , send me a private message on here or check out my website -LRB- a link is available on my profile page -RRB-
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from InsuranceLibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is term life insurance better than permanent life insurance ? '' Well , did you hear the two words in there ? One is term and one is permanent . When I 'm looking at term insurance , I 'm looking at obligations . I 'm looking at liabilities that I may that are temporal that they are not forever . And so I 'm going to look at term insurance to cover those ideas , those indemnification needs , and if I have permanent needs them I 'm going have to look at different forms of life insurance that are permanent . It could be Par Whole Life . It could Current Assumption UL . It could be Indexed Universal Life . It could be Variable Life , depending upon what my propensity for risks are , but I 'm always looking , is this a temporary expense reimbursement ? Or is this a permanent need that will never go away ? It 's never not is term insurance better or worse than permanent ? It 's the issue of the need . Well , that 's our consumer question for the day . If you have any questions just submit them to www.InsuranceLibrary.com .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
That is a great question ! Generally , once you are pregnant , it is too late to purchase a disability policy . It 's kind of like trying to get an auto insurance policy after you 've wrecked the car , the insurance company knows they will have to pay out , and are reluctant to sell you a policy , knowing they are going to take a loss . Unfortunately , unlike health insurance , with disability insurance the pre-existing condition exclusion will apply . I 'm sorry . Thank you though , for asking !
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is buying term and investing the difference better than cash value life insurance ? '' Well , when I 'm looking at buying term and investing the difference , what am I investing it in ? And is that a risk area ? And if I 'm looking at permanent insurance , am I looking at guarantees and guaranteed returns ? Am I looking at using indexing ? Am I looking at risk-based insurance , like variable ? When I put those two together , I want to look at both of those plans and to see which one comes out the best . We have programs that we 've developed that will measure , is it better to buy term insurance and invest the difference in whatever product line you want to think of , whether it 's mutual funds or ETF 's . Or is it better to keep it inside a contract for the tax deferral and the possible tax-free income ? You can compare those things and always know which way to go with a simple program that will measure it for you . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Yes , there are some companies that require medical underwriting that will allow a pregnant woman to apply in her first two trimesters . There are some No Exam companies that will allow a woman to apply while pregnant in any trimester . You must be within the policy 's weight guidelines and not be experiencing complications due to pregnancy in order to obtain a policy while pregnant , unless the policy has very few health questions -LRB- simplified or guaranteed issue -RRB- , in which case those things might not matter .
I am not aware of any carrier that will issue a life insurance policy to a pregnant female . There are many risk factors to consider which make it impossible to properly price the risk of a life insurance policy on a woman that is pregnant . Every carrier I am aware of will not consider an application until the pregnancy has ended and the woman has been released from her doctor 's care .
Yes you can get health insurance when pregnant , but there are limitations . There are three places to turn . You can enroll in a group health plan through your employer . HIPPA prevents group plans from excluding pregnancy as a pre-existing condition even if you had no prior coverage . You would enroll during your open enrollment . You can opt into an Affordable Care Act plan in your state marketplace during open enrollment . The policy would take effect on January 1 . Any pregnancy related medical expenses would be immediately covered . Medicaid provides immediate coverage for pregnant women who meet income guidelines . There are no open enrollment limitations for Medicaid .
Yes , unfortunately , pregnancy is a pre-existing condition for disability insurance if you apply while pregnant . If you applied before becoming pregnant , obviously , then the pregnancy would not be a pre-existing condition . However , some polices may require that you apply several months before you become pregnant in order to qualify .
All health insurance plans now cover maternity . They handle maternity just like any other claim . So how much it would cost you depends on the plan you get ... . What is the deductible ? What is the out-of-pocket maximum ? If you 're buying a plan specifically because you see childbirth down the road , consider 2 things : If you 're pregnant now , you ca n't get insurance because you 've obviously got a pre-existing condition . If you 're not pregnant now , and you 're buying a new plan , then you 'll have to replacethe planby January anywaydue tohealthcare reform . So if you want health insurance now , there 's really no reason to factor childbirth into the equasion because you 'll be changing plans -LRB- due to healthcare reform -RRB- before you deliver .
Can you get disability insurance while pregnant ? Yes , you can . Will they cover the pregnancy and any complications with ? NOPE . Disability policies carry a pre-existing condition clause that allows them to turn down a claim for a condition that occurs prior to the application . So you could get a disability policy while pregnant , but everything connected to the pregnancy would not be covered .
Can you get disability insurance if you are already pregnant ? Yes , but not for the pregnancy . It is possible to get disability insurance while pregnant , but disability insurance plans use a pre-existing condition clause in the policy to prevent a person from going on immediate claim when they purchase the policy .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
You can switch health insurance pans while pregnant , but make sure to do your due diligence first . If you are increasing benefits and lowering maternity out-of-pocket costs then switching would be a great idea . On the other side of that argument , if you 're happy with your current plan and benefits you may find staying where you are until the baby is born serves you better . In the new arena of health reform and individual health insurance you can only switch during open enrollment or if you qualify for a special enrollment due to a life changing event . It 's best -LRB- pregnant or not -RRB- to find the right program and stick with it throughout the year to avoid headaches . For more information on how maternity is covered under Obamacare plans please visit www.clminsure.com
If your daughter had health insurance at least a year before she got pregnant them yes , it will be covered . Read the fine print on the policy.If she tries to get insurance after discovering she was pregnant , then it is considered a pre-existing condition and she wo n't be covered unless there is a complication during labor .
That is a great question ! You can find anything on the internet these days , and certainly life insurance is on there for the taking . I 'm not a big fan of buying it on the internet , but I do think it 's good to research and comparison shop on it . Here 's why I do n't recommend buying online : 1 . -RRB- If you apply on line , the price you are quoted is almost always the `` best price '' scenario . It may be quite different from the actual price the policy comes to you with , after the prescription , MIB and underwriting processes are completed . A live agent will have discussed this with you , and in most cases can give you an exact quote . 2 . -RRB- If there is an issue with your health , and you are declined more than once , this becomes a red flag for any other company that you will apply with . Again , a live agent can prevent this from happening by steering you toward an appropriate policy/company . 3 . -RRB- Maybe I 'm a little old fashioned , but the protection of my family still means a lot to me . I 'm not comfortable putting my information out there on the web , especially with the almost daily revelations of who 'd been hacked months ago that we 're just now being told about . Add to that the horrendous experiences with on-line customer service , and I 'm not counting on them to answer in an emergency . I want a live body answering my call . I hope that helps you , thank you for asking !
You can purchase individual life insurance while pregnant . Most companies will not have a problem with the first two trimesters underwriting an individual who is pregnant and at that point experiencing a normal pregnancy without complications . The third trimester is a bit more dicey as most carriers at that point may wish to wait until after childbirth to underwrite . I have written and had issued life insurance for people up to the 7th month without any extra premium or restrictions by the insurance company . It is going to depend on the health of the person and how the pregnancy is going .
You can not get a short term disability policy that will pay for time off for a normal pregnancy and delivery , once you are already pregnant . If you got the short term disability insurance policy before becoming pregnant , they can receive benefits from that policy when you delivery your baby .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Will Renters Insurance Cover A Trampoline ?
Having a trampoline is a liability issue . Most property polices will exclude the use of a trampoline so if you are wanting to own a trampoline I highly suggest you search out an independent agent who can locate you an insurance carrier that would consider the use of a trampoline .
Trampolines are an attractive nuisance not unlike the pond on the back forty , They are the source of a lot of additional liability exposure to the policy and the homeowner . The biggest reason that liability increases is because more than one child or person is one the equipment at a time . Most families with a trampoline have n't established risk-based rules for use and enjoyment and so what looks to be a fun and exciting play thing , becomes a hazard teeming with potential to cause great bodily harm . Insurance companies know from experience that trampolines cause losses and are expensive to insure because the injuries can become catastrophic . Broken bones are one thing . A broken neck with paralysis is completely another but well within the outcomes on a trampoline . Add to the trampoline an almost complete lack of training or instruction on the correct methods of use -LRB- and the lack of appropriate rules for use -RRB- , and we find the trampoline becomes similar to a loaded gun just waiting for curious hands with just as much potential to destroy a healthful life . Another issue that crops us is the degradation of the platform fabric since it is exposed to weather and sunlight . People have been known to bust through the platform because it became degraded due to the sun and weather effects . Bones get broke hitting the found and frame members below the deck . In my experience , most companies do n't want anything to do with insuring a home with a trampoline . A relative few do n't charge additional premium and do n't restrict the presence of a trampoline . Others still will permit a trampoline when it is is present for coverage at an additional charge . One carrier we represent charges an additional $ 75 annually for the trampoline , requires the fences to be installed -LRB- most trampolines come with them -RRB- , and they wo n't provide insurance on the home unless the trampoline is also included in coverage . All in all , you do n't simply have the choice to not insure the trampoline since the mere act of having one dramatically increases the chances of having a loss ! That said , trampolines can be enjoyed safely but it requires careful and near constant monitoring by the responsible adults , the establishment of rules for use , the ability to protect the equipment from non-invited use by neighbors when the owner or their children are not using the equipment , and inspection periodically for signs of degradation and normal wear and tear . Additionally , basic skills should be discussed , taught and understood , limits should be placed on the behavior that is allowed on the trampoline , and responsible adults should be willing to stop all play when careful control can not be maintained . Many injuries occur when the parents are not paying attention or aware from the home . Let 's face it , no one wants to be sued for the liability that may arise out of an injury on a trampoline and no one wants to deal with the often catastrophic injuries that can occur to your children or the neighbors . These latter comments and insight are a good foundation for understanding why an insurance company does n't like trampolines and why homeowner insurance is often negatively influenced when they are present on the property .
Many companies refuse to write a homeowners policy on a home with a trampoline . Despite the safety devices that are often used , the trampoline has a record of claims that make it unacceptable to many companies . If you are already covered and purchase a trampoline there will probably not be any change until the company discovers the trampoline . You will probably be notified of either a cancellation or notified that the company will not renew coverage . In either event contact your agent .
Trampolines are a major problem for insurance companies . Most insurance companies will not insure a home when they know that there is a trampoline present . Some insurance companies will accept a home with a trampoline . There are brokers who specialize in companies that handle special risk cases . You should consult the yellow pages and locate someone who can quote a policy with the trampoline .
Many companies refuse to issue a homeowners policy when there is a trampoline on the property . The trampoline is clearly identified as a hazard . Regardless of mechanisms to make them safe , there is still a high incidence of claims involving a trampoline . Companies that will insure a home with a trampoline will normally be considerably more expensive .
Having a trampoline is a liability issue . Most property polices will exclude the use of a trampoline so if you are wanting to own a trampoline I highly suggest you search out an independent agent who can locate you an insurance carrier that would consider the use of a trampoline .
Typically speaking yes . Home owners insurance carriers are going to want to see that the trampoline is secure , meaning in a fenced yard with a locked gate , . That is saying also that IF the carrier will even accept the risk of the trampoline . You should contact your independent insurance agent before purchasing a trampoline and ask them what their carrier would say about a trampoline .
There are more than likely some companies out there that will write a homeowners policy with a trampoline on the property , but most will not . The liability issues with the trampolines have become very costly to many insurance companies . If you find a company that will accept the trampoline and not exclude it be prepared to pay a premium equal to the risk assumed by the carrier . Contact a local agent to find out if they have any carriers that they work with that accept trampolines as part of the homeowners policy .
Trampolines may be fun but they are problematic for insurance companies . Some may reject coverage if one has a trampoline , while others may accept the risk so long as it is fitted with a perimeter fence or screen that can be locked when not in use . Trampolines , polls , and yard swing sets don/t in and of themselves cause premium increases , but they are `` attractive risks '' that increase the probabilities of a liability claim . Thus insurance companies consider properties that have them very carefully .
Good question . Many insurance companies will ask if you have a trampoline on the premises . If you do , it will likely make you ineligible for 50 % of the homeowners insurance companies in NY . If you have homeowners insurance already and you did n't have a trampoline -LRB- at the time of application -RRB- you can purchase a trampoline and coverage would be afforded under most policies . They key is to avoid making a material misrepresentation on the application . Of course , always check with your local independent agent .
Great question ! The best thing to do would be to check with your agent first , and ask . There are many injuries every year from trampoline accidents , so there is an increased risk . Typically increased risk = increased cost . I can assure you that should someone be injured on your property , on your trampoline , and they file a claim against you for the hospital expense , your trampoline will end up costing you plenty . If you have more questions , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
There are several ways that you can purchase a renters policy . If you search the internet you will find some websites that will actually quote and issue a renters policy . The problem you face with this approach is that a policy is selected to pay your damages when you suffer a loss may be inadequate . It is quite likely that when you actually suffer that loss you will find that you are not sufficiently insured . Then the insurance policy you have been paying on becomes the most expensive policy that you could have purchased because it wont cover your loss . The better approach is to engage an insurance agent . You may not know an agent . Get recommendations from your neighbors , friends and colleagues . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . You really want everyone to be on the same page at the time of a loss . The agent will probably start by asking you the value of your personal property . To prepare for that question , I suggest that you take pictures of everything that you own . You can store that valuable record off site in case of a loss . Review the pictures and make an estimate of the cost to replace everything that you own . The sum of those estimates determines the value you need to set on your renters policy . Remember that you are looking at replacement value , not current value . In this process you might have property that is subject to internal limits within the policy . You need to specify the replacement value of any jewelry , guns , computer equipment , and collectibles . There are other classes of property that warrant special attention . Ask the agent about any unusual property that might be in your possession . The next thing that the agent will discuss is the liability limit . Insist on the highest limit that the agent can write . You can never have enough liability insurance . This protects you by providing for your defense and any awards against you up to the limits of the policy . You want these limits to be very high . A lawsuit can ruin your life . If you have a pet make sure that the agent knows about the pet . This is particularly important if you own a dog . Policies often have greatly reduced liability limits for dogs and may exclude all coverage for dogs of certain breeds or with a history of biting . This is a major source of claims . If you have a trampoline on the property makes sure that the agent knows that as well . Often owning a renters policy is a requirement of a lease . In those cases the landlord generally wants to be named as an additional insured . You need to have his or her name and address to provide to the agent . Incidentally , this is a reasonable requirement of the landlord and might be required by his or her insurance company . The final piece of information has to do with any losses that you might have previously suffered either at the unit you are currently renting or another unit . The information should be as detailed as possible to assist in underwriting your application .
For most insurance companies , presence of a trampoline is a cause for the company to decline the home . If a trampoline is detected on the property after the policy is issued , the policy will likely not be renewed .
It may , yes . Many insurance companies wili require that the trampoline be outfitted with an installed safety net system that completely encloses the circumference of the trampoline . The opening of that system will also need to be able to be completely secured by a locking mechanism . In many cases , without this compliance , many companies will not offer coverage at all .
Most companies do not provide coverage for trampolines under homeowners or renters insurance and if they provide coverage for them there are typically strict guidelines that must be followed to keep coverage in effect . Every policy is different . I recommend that you read your policy completely to determine the coverages provide or contact your local agent and have them explain the coverages that your policy provides .
Many carriers will not provide renters/homeowners insurance coverage if the insured has a trampoline on the property that is covered . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
That is a good question . As long as you have all the necessary information about the property and there has been no major losses a homeowners insurance policy can be bound within a day . Keep in mind that credit , condition of the property & square feet of living area all go into the rating factors for HO insurance . Additionally , if a trampoline , diving board or viscous pet is on the property it can complicate purchasing insurance . It is best to give at least 2-3 days for the agent to look around and get the best rates available in the market .
Your neighbor and yourself with similiar house values could get insurance from the same company and your rates will be different . Insurance premiums are determined by many factors , including your insurance score , loss history , the existance of dogs , trampolines , pools , oil tanks , etc. . They best way to get the best coverage for yourself at the best rate is to have an a local reputable independent agent with access to multiple carriers take one application for you and then they will shop all of their markets .
There is no single answer to that question . Which Homeowners policy is best for you will depend on your individual situation . Where do you live ? How old is your home ? Do you have a dog , a pool , a trampoline ? The best thing to do is speak with an independent agent and shop around . An independent agent can help you shop multiple companies and advise you on which plan is right for you .
Good question . Typical homeowners exclusions are flood , wear & tear , intentional acts and mechanical breakdown . Many policies will have exclusions for trampolines , water damage , wind exclusions , etc. . It 's very important that you check your individual policy for your specific exclusions . Usually towards the end of the policy you will see the exclusionary endorsement list . If you have any questions I would contact your independent insurance agent that holds the policy .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How Does Long Term Care Insurance Work ?
Most Long Term Care Insurance policies pay the insured person a set amount of money , as dictated by the policy they purchased , when the need for long term care arises . There are triggers that determine when payments will start . These include the inability to independently do to or more ADL 's -LRB- activities of daily living such as bathing or dressing -RRB- . Some policies pay the institution providing the care rather than the person receiving the care . Payments are made until the funds or years in the policy run out .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Technically , no . Medicare was designed to help the elderly pay for acute sickness and accidents from whichone can heal relatively quickly . It does not cover chronic illness or prolonged rehabilitation from an accident . However , Medicare will provide payment of costs for some `` short-term '' recovery for the elderly that are enrolled in Medicare part A & B . There are prequalifications and limitations to what it will pay for , how much it will pay , the type of care it will pay for , and for how long -LRB- maximum of 100 days -RRB- . Payment for long-term care is usually paid out of pocket , or by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . To receive payment for care from the latter , one must be `` impoverished '' as defined by the state that they live in , and they usually must be in a facility -LRB- Medicaid/Medical only pay a few hundred dollars a month of home care -RRB- . The only other solution to the problem of paying for long-term care , either at home or in a facility , is long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- . This sector of the health insurance industry is in a bit of turmoil right now and if you have decided that you want to explore LTCi , make sure that you work with someone that is a specialist in this area . There are an infinite number of designs in coverage which can vary the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- by thousands of dollars a year . Also , be sure that you are working with agents that only work with the best LTCi companies in the industry , those that have strong financials , high ratings , and are committed to the field . The most important thing is to have a plan . Your plan may or may not include LTCi . But , if it does , buy no later than your mid-fifties as the price really starts to climb after that . Dont depend on Medicare for the payment of long-term care costs .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Long-term care is worth it when 1 . A person is capable of affording to pay the premium for at least a base policy . There is no sense buying a long-term care policy only to have to let it go later because one can not afford it anymore . 2 . Assets that are targeted for moving to the next generation need protection against the high cost ofprolonged end-of-life care . 3 . There is a family history of dementia or Alzheimer 's disease , or other debilitating ailment that might be genetically transmitted . 4 . One does not want to be a financial , emotional , or psychological burden to their spouse or adult children . 5 . Quality of care is an issue . 6 . Staying at home for as long as possible if one becomes chronically ill instead of having to go into a care facility is important . 7 . Adult children are willing to pay premiums for a long-term care policy for their parents . Probability statistics are not entirely reliable because we really do n't know what new medical procedures or accommodations may come along in the future that would change the current situation regarding long-term care . But , the best guess I 've seen justified is that about 1 in 6 will need about 2 years of care to perform daily activities before they die . The cost for that in todays dollars depends on where one lives and how long family members can last taking care of a seriously disabled elderly person before they need skilled help .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Are The Best Ways To Save For Retirement ?
What are the best ways to save for retirement ? Well , when I see this question and I do see it a lot I sort of answer it this way . The best ways to save for retirement is to get into the habit of saving for retirement . There are many ways to save for retirement , there is no best way , there are ways that work best for you , but again the big thing is to do it .
There are of course numerous ways to save for retirement ; which one is best depends on your objectives and circumstances . You should use taxed deferred plans when available . These allow your money to compound and grow without taxation . In Canada , RRSPs -LRB- Registered Retirement Savings Plans -RRB- contributions within limits , can be deducted from your income , grow taxed deferred and are not taxable until you make withdrawals . TFSAs -LRB- Tax Free Savings Accounts -RRB- contributions are not deductible , they do however , grow tax deferred , and withdrawals are not taxed . Which one is better depends on your circumstances . If your employer offers to match your contributions be sure and take advantage of this `` free money . '' Working with a financial planner will help you determine what plan is best for you . Additional information can be found at www.retirementplanningchecklist.ca If you have further questions , please do not hesitate to contact me .
What are the best ways to save for retirement ? Well , when I see this question and I do see it a lot I sort of answer it this way . The best ways to save for retirement is to get into the habit of saving for retirement . There are many ways to save for retirement , there is no best way , there are ways that work best for you , but again the big thing is to do it .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
How much you need to save for retirement by the time you are 40 depends of course on your desired retirement lifestyle and the amount needed to fund it . Without those details , I unable to offer you an opinion . There are online calculators available of course . However , here is a retirement worksheet to help you understand the process . I have used 6 % for illustration purposes only , it could be higher or lower and is only to give you a point of reference . Age 65 was used as the retirement age -LRB- 25 years in the future -RRB- , Again . this is for information purposes only . 1 . Annual retirement income which must be provided by savings $ _____ 2 . Amount you must save to generate income $ _____ -LRB- line 1 . X 11.55 -RRB- 3 . Amount you have already saved $ _____ 4 . Amount these savings will have grown $ _____ by the time you retire -LRB- line 3 X 4.2919 -RRB- 5 . Amount of savings still needed $ _____ -LRB- line 4 minus line 2 -RRB- 6 . Amount you need to save each year $ _____ -LRB- line 5 X .01720 -RRB- If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Where the best place to save for your retirement depends on your situation . As a general rule though a plan that has tax deferral is best . That will allow you to receive the full effect of compound interest or growth . In Canada plans like Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- are tax deductible and provide tax deferred growth , they are designed specifically for retirement savings . The income is taxable when it is withdrawn . If you have a plan where your employer will contribute and perhaps match your contributions . It might a Registered Pension Plan or towards your RRSP , regardless that is hard to beat . Other option is a Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- where the contributions are not deductible , but have Tax Free growth and the money is not taxed on withdrawal . There is no cookie cutter plan or product that is best . I really depends on your individual objectives . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
In order to determine how much you need to save for retirement , you first need to define what a successful retirement means to you . The next step is to do a budget to determine what is needed to finance your desired lifestyle . This is a better approach than simply randomly choosing a % of your current income . There are calculators available on many websites to help you determine how much you will need to save to generate a specific retirement income . Given the complexity of retirement planning though , you would be best served working with a financial or retirement planner . There are resources and additional information on Retirement Planning on my website , www.jpw.ca . It includes a Retirement Planning Checklist that will save you time and money . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Which retirement plan is best ? The one that you actually do . It is more about the habit of saving than anything else . Developing a savings habit will aide anyone in retirement . Waiting for the optimal plan `` before '' you start saving is sort of an excuse I hear many times from people who are n't savers . They fail to set aside funds for the future in any form because it is n't of value to them yet . There are many retirement plan choices , there is no `` best '' as putting zero dollars aside ends up with zero saved . The `` best '' plan is the one where you decide to save and contribute money to .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
A columnist for Fool.com , Morgan Housel , just wrote a terrific article on this topic titled , An Open Letter to Everyone Under Age 30 . He describes why the best estimate for what stocks will return over many decades is 6.6 % per year , and then goes on to put some real numbers to what 6.6 % growth means : Every dollar saved by a 20 year old for the 45 years until retirement will grow to be worth $ 18.50 . Since a 30 year old only has 35 years until retirement , each dollar saved will only be worth about $ 9.60 . As Housel says , `` Saving a little bit of money when you are young can be a more efficient way to build wealth than saving a lot when you 're older . ''
There are several steps that a retired person can take to increase their income . The first is to unretire . Retirement is overrated . Working has positive effects on a person and when the work is meaningful it can add years of enjoyment . It can certainly stretch your retirement budget . Even before you retire you can discuss this with your employer to determine if there is some way you can return to the workforce as either a consultant or contract worker . It would be best to determine which aspects of your work you enjoy and what type of projects you want to do . Enter into an agreement to work on those things that interest you . I know a teacher who shows up two periods of day to teach Physics and then gets in his car and drives home . He enjoys what he does and doesnt want to participate in the wider campus life . Sometimes it isnt possible to continue to work for your current employer . In those instances make an inventory of work in which you excel . Armed with that list contact people who need full or part-time help in your area of expertise and offer your services , or contract for your services . If you can not find an employer who needs your talents consider working for yourself . There are a variety of ways to advertise your skills and there are people looking for your talents . If you want to try something altogether new there are franchise opportunities available . These opportunities run the gamut from stores to on-line services and sales . Finding a program that suits your capabilities and temperament should be relatively easy . Some of these opportunities can become quite lucrative . I have clients who are leaving their employment long before retirement because their on-line sales business is flourishing . Obviously working provides income and it also reduces the number of years that you will depend upon your retirement savings to provide income . If you are drawing retirement income this will give you money which you can put into a Roth IRA to fund the period when you finally do stop working altogether . One of the most important things that working does is to allow you to delay receiving social security . For a long list of reasons it is usually to a retirees advantage to delay the start of benefits until they reach age 70 . The increase in benefits is substantial to the worker and to the widow it is amazing . Working provides a great deal of emotional satisfaction and a sense of freedom . Another technique to increase your retirement income is to tap into the equity of your home . Regardless of whether the mortgage is paid or not , you can take out a reverse mortgage after age 62 . A reverse mortgage will allow you to tap the equity in your home . This is a complex transaction and the only transaction that I can think of where an applicant must be counselled by a disinterested party . It is the right move for some , though and could make your retirement more comfortable . Another way to stretch your retirement dollars is to determine what you own of value that you no longer need . If what you own can be converted to cash it might help stretch your retirement income assets . Selling things on the internet is relatively inexpensive and can be quite fruitful . I advertised an accordion on the internet and was besieged with interested buyers . Estate sales demonstrate that there are things that are not being used by the retirees that are of interest to the public . Often cars are no longer being used , undeveloped land lies idle and jewelry lies unused in a safe deposit box . Another way to stretch your retirement income is to determine what services are available to seniors in your location that cost you money currently . Many places offer discounts and sometimes services can be free . Even utilities companies participate in programs to lower costs for seniors . With almost 50 % of retirees depending on Social Security for their retirement income it is very important to understand how you can stretch that income and even increase it .
Thirty years certainly could be enough to save for retirement . The total amount you need to save in today 's dollars depends largely on what retirement success means to you . Once you have a basic idea , you can determine what is needed to fund your desired lifestyle . Deciding what you want to do 30 years from now is quite difficult so using the `` standard '' 70 % of current income is a good starting point . Once you are within 10-15 years , you should start fine tuning your retirement plan to get things aligned . NOTE : The rule of compound interest 72 interest rate = the number of years it takes for the funds to double . For example 72 10 % = 7.2 . That means at 10 % interest your money doubles every 7.2 years . Therefore , the earlier you start the better . More information on what you ought to know about protecting and growing your Nest Egg can be found at WEBSITELINK If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is a really good question ! And trust me , you 're not the only one asking it ... There are really very few certainties in life , but we all seek to find as many as possible . Knowing that we have a safely protected retirement certainly ranks up near the top . While we can not guarantee that our retirement fund will last , there are some things that you can do to help ensure it : 1 . -RRB- Have a clear picture of what retirement means to you - does it mean travelling and dining out often ? If so , your fund will need to be large enough to accommodate that . If it looks more like fishing and working part time , then perhaps your fund can be a little more modest , and still be fine . But if you do not know , `` People without vision perish , '' as the Proverb goes . 2 . -RRB- Pay close attention to how your 401k is performing . If you do n't know what it is doing , you are right to worry . While I do not recommend knee jerk reactions to losses , trends are worth paying attention to , especially if they are negative , precipitous , and lengthy . 3 . -RRB- Know your spending habits . Have a very good grip on your budget process , and where you can squeeze out a little more to invest . Having good habits and keeping debt low entering retirement helps with the life of your investment also . 4 . -RRB- Do not put all of your eggs in one basket , or as you more commonly hear , diversify . Start a Roth IRA to balance out your taxable 401k ; Purchase an annuity or two to ensure a steady income stream that will not run out . Purchase some property that you can earn an income from during retirement ; invest in bonds and low maintenance mutual funds . 5 . -RRB- Plan for the inevitable medical expenses that come with age . The Law allows for a dedicated retirement account used exclusively for health care to be non-taxable , if health issues are likely , start one . Look at a life insurance policy that includes living benefit provisions , or look into long term care protection . If your company offers an HSA , enroll , and start paying into it . 6 . -RRB- Save , save , save . Find high yield savings accounts , and be certain to have an emergency account . Having one allows you to be able to not have to make withdrawals from your retirement funds , or acquire more debt . Having one allows you to be able to make investments that otherwise would only be dreams . The best way to alleviate worry is to trust ; Faith in the One who provides for us , and being a good steward of what we 're given allows us to sleep at night . Hopefully there are ideas here that will help you . Please feel free to contact me if you would like a more personal analysis of where you sit . A great question , and one I 'm glad that you asked . Thanks !
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Auto Insurance Cover Vandalism ?
Typically yes , less your deductible if you have comprehensive -LRB- otherwise known as '' other than collision '' -RRB- coverage on your auto policy . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If you have full coverage , meaning Collision and Comprehensive , then yes it would cover vandalism . As with any claim , however , find out how much the repairs will be before turning in the claim unless the damage is extensive . In the case of vandalism you will need to file an accident report with the police . This will help prove your claim if you decide to turn it in . If the damage is close to or below your deductible you may not want to turn in a claim . If you are unsure call your agent , not the insurance company .
In a word , yes , auto insurance does provide coverage for vandalism . This coverage is provided by the pysical damage portion of your policy under `` Comprehensive '' or `` Other than Collision '' and will be subject to your deductible . In most cases , in order to settle such a claim , your insurance company will want to receive a copy of a police report along with an estimate of the damage . By the way , if something is stolen from the inside of your car - your phone , clothing or golf clubs to name a few examples , these are NOT covered by your car insurance policy . Personal property loss is covered by your Homeowners ' , Condo Unit Owners ' or Renters ' Insurance policies so be sure to have these .
If your car is the unfortunate victim of vandalism , will your current car insurance policy cover the claim ? The answer to this question depends on the type of auto insurance coverage you currently carry . If you only carry the minimum liability limits , the answer is no . However , if you carry comprehensive coverage , the answer is yes less any applicable annual deductible you have selected for your policy . Vandalism to your vehicle could include a variety of incidents ; key scratches , broken glass and other damage caused with malicious intent . Vandalism is different than burglary . If something was removed from your vehicle as a result of the vandalism , you must be sure to state this in your report . In most cases , comprehensive coverage will cover both theft and vandalism . The amount of coverage your policy offers depends not only on the overall type of policy you have selected , but the coverage limits , the type of claim , and your chosen annual deductible . In the case of high deductible policies , it may be more beneficial to pay for the repairs out of pocket than to run it through your insurance company . Before any claim will be paid , you must file a report with your local police department describing the nature of the vandalism .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
I 'm afraid you have confused what comprehensive insurance means . In regards to comprehensive insurance , `` comprehensive '' is a component of auto insurance , but not a type of insurance . comprehensive coverage protects your vehicle from losses that occur by means other than collision . Examples include theft , vandalism , weather damage , hitting a deer , etc. . As far as borrowing someone else 's vehicle , your auto insurance does n't cover you . Their insurance does . That is , auto insurance always follows the vehicle , not the driver .
Auto insurance is not a maintenance contract and does not cover any type of auto repair not caused by an accident . Auto insurance covers liability if you are sued , medical payments for persons in your car , protection from uninsured drivers , and if you have full coverage it will cover collision damages and under the comprehensive , glass , vandalism , and any loss other than collision caused by an accidental occurrence .
Vandalism to a vehicle is typically covered under the comprehensive portion of your car insurance . Fire , theft and vandalism are three of the biggest components of the comprehensive section of your policy . Usually , the deductible is considerably lower than your collision deductible . Vandalism is covered under your homeowner 's insurance policy , although it would apply to contents of your home , the dwelling and other structures . Vandalism to personal property inside a vehicle would be a different type of claim than the vehicle itself .
It can . Vandalism is covered under comprehensive which is one of two types of coverage that can be included under physical damage on your auto policy . The other coverage that protects your actual vehicle is collision . Comprehensive and collision are required when you have a loan but are optional when you do n't . These two coverages provide protection for the car itself if it gets damaged and typically requires that you pay a deductible first before the insurance company responds . Typically , collision covers anything you collide or have an upset with while comprehensive covers everything else including fire , theft , and vandalism .
Auto coverage will vary slightly depending on your state . However auto insurance is typically broken down into the following coverages : Liability Bodily Injury - Pays to cover the medical expenses of the damaged party -LRB- typically another driver and their passengers -RRB- if you cause an accident . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . There is a limit per person and an aggregate limit per accident . Liability Physical Damage - Pays to cover damage to vehicles or other physical property -LRB- mailbox , guardrail , traffic signal , etc. -RRB- caused by the insured -LRB- you -RRB- . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . Uninsured Motorist Liability & Uninsured Motorist Physical Damage - This coverage protects the insured against motorists without insurance or with insufficient limits to cover medical and physical damages to the insured . This pays up to the per person and aggregate limits listed on the policy . Collision - Pays the cost to repair/replace your vehicle if you hit something/someone minus the deductible listed on your policy . Note that if your vehicle is a total loss then you will be compensated based on the actual cash value of your vehicle which is the value of your vehicle considering depreciation . Other Than Collision -LRB- Comprehensive -RRB- - This coverage pays to repair/replace your vehicle for theft , vandalism , hail , damage by animals , etc minus the deductible on your policy . If your vehicle is a total loss it will be valued on an actual cash value basis . Personal Injury Protection - Pays for medical/disability expenses of the insured for an injury occurring in or around your vehicle up to the limit listed on the policy . Accidental Death & Dismemberment - Small life insurance component often added to auto policies that will pay a death benefit if you die or are permanently disabled in an auto accident . Towing/Roadside Assistance - Varies significantly by company and state Rental Coverage - Covers the cost of a rental vehicle for the time that your vehicle is in the shop due to a covered loss . There are multiple levels and this coverage may not cover the full cost of the rental .
It depends on a few different things . First , the type of vehicle will affect the policy premium . For example , a 2005 Toyota Corolla would typically have a lower premium than a 2005 Cadillac Escalade due to the cost difference in the vehicle and the cost difference in the repairs of the vehicle.Second , the driving record of the insured will affect the policy premium . For example , someone with one speeding ticket and an at fault accident will have a higher policy premium than someone with no speeding tickets or accidents . Thisis due to the fact that the insurance companieswill see that person witha ticket and accident as a greater risk to insure than the other person with a clean driving record . Third , the garaged location -LRB- home -RRB- of the vehicle will affect the policy premium . If you are garaging your vehicle in an area with a high rate of auto theft or vandalism the policy premium will be higher than in an area with a low rate of auto theft or vandalism . Again , this goes back to a greater risk for the insurance company . There are many more rating factors that the insurance companies use and they differ from state to state . Here in Arizona , for example , they will look at your credit score , occupation , and highest level of education in order to provide you with a price on coverage .
Vandalism to a car is not typically covered under a homeowners insurance policy . If you wish to have vandalism coverage for your automobile then you need to purchase comprehensive coverage from your auto insurance carrier . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverages provided by your policy and any exclusions that may be contained within the policy .
Collision is a defined term in the Personal Auto Policy , so there is not a lot of debate about what collision means . According my copy of the Personal Auto Policy published by The Insurance Service Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- , Form PP 00 01 01 05 , Part D - Coverage For Damage To Your Auto , Paragraph B. . . Collision means the upset of your covered auto or a non-owned auto or their impact with another vehicle or object . Loss caused by the following is considered other than collision : 1 . Missiles or falling objects ; 2 . Fire ; 3 . Theft or larceny ; 4 . Explosion or earthquake ; 5 . Windstorm ; 6 . Hail , water or flood ; 7 . Malicious mischief or vandalism ; 8 . Riot or civil commotion ; 9 . Contact with bird or animal ; or 10 . Breakage of glass . If breakage of glass is caused by a collision , you may elect to have it considered a loss caused by collision . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Renters insurance covers your personal contents of your rented property . If you vehicle was vandalized that is a comprehensive claim under your auto insurance , assuming that you carry comprehensive coverage . If you do not carry comprehensive they only thing to do is sue the person who vandalized your car , and most likly you do not know who they are . Sorry about your misfortune and best of luck to you .
A homeowners policy -LRB- primary occupied dwelling -RRB- written on a special form would cover vandalism . This is not to be mistaken with a rental property which may exclude vandalism , especially if caused by tenants . Check with your agent for the details and coverages of your particular policy to see if your policy includes vandalism coverages .
Yes , vandalism is one of the covered perils in the Comprehensive portion of most standard auto policies . Comprehensive is the more broadly defined of the two elements that make up the Physical Damage portion of a car insurance policy , the other element being Collision . Collision provides coverage for damages sustained by your car if involved in an accident with another motor vehicle , a stationary object or a human being . Comprehensive provides coverage for all other named perils including vandalism .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Yes , your Comprehensive coverage covers any animal strike , falling trees , rocks , vandalism , anything other than a collision . Since an animal is not considered an inanimate object , an animal strike is covered under the comprehensive portion of your auto policy . Collision covers a collision with trees , other auto 's or other vehicles , and other inanimate objects .
Homeowners Insurance is most often written on Form HO-3 ; the Form HO-3 Homeowners Special Form does include damage from the perils Vandalism and Malicious Mischief . The coverage will apply to the Dwelling and Detached Structures covered by the policy ; however , the deductible will apply . On the other hand , if only Basic Fire Coverage is purchased , sometimes known as ` Fire & Lightning ' , there would be no coverage afforded for damage caused by vandalism . This would apply to forms HO-1 or DP-1 which are the most basic forms of coverage available for single family residences . It is important that you review your specific insurance policy to assure that you are certain of what is covered ; also , you may contact a company representative for a detailed review of your policy !
Renters insurance would not cover the vandalism to your car , but could cover vandalism to the personal belongings inside the car , if they in fact were vandalized . You would need auto physical damage coverage in place to cover the vandalism . In lieu of liability coverage on your car , you need `` other than collision '' coverage or `` comprehensive '' coverage which are synonymous with each other . Good luck with your claim And please do n't hesitate to contact me with any additional questions that may help you out . Best , Josh DeBoer 918-582-8206 jdeboer@fdands.com
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What To Look For In A Renters Insurance Policy ?
A renters policy is a package that usually contains personal property coverage and liability coverage . The most important thing to look for is the agent . Make sure the agent is someone that you trust . Make sure the agent provides all the information that you provide to the insurance company and that the policy is exactly what you ordered . Another important thing is limits . If the limits arent high enough to cover the potential loss , you might be very dissatisfied at the time of a claim . Dont skimp . Make sure you get enough coverage , particularly for liability .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Obtaining Renters Insurance is simple and quick ! There are n't too many questions to answer and there are just a few points to look out for ! If you are renting an apartment , a house or a townhouse/condo , you would qualify to purchase a renters insurance policy . If the landlord has required you to purchase the insurance , it is important to find out whether the landlord wishes to be listed as an ` Additional Insured ' on the policy ; if so , you would need to ask how the Additional Insured clause would read -LRB- i.e. Name , Address , Account # etc. . . -RRB- If you are simply looking for the Cheapest Renters Insurance , you would request the minimum available Personal Property Coverage , the minimum available Personal Liability Coverage , and the maximum Deductible available . This would generate the lowest premium . On the other hand , if it is your desire to assure that all your belongings including artwork , jewelry , furs and additional high value possessions are sufficiently covered , you would need to speak with a licensed representative to assess whether the policy has available options to extend coverage to provide what you would need ; or if perhaps , an additional Personal Article Floater may need to be purchased . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Renters policies are essentially the same type of policy as a regular homeowners adjusted to deal with property and liability exposures for a person who rents as opposed to some one who owns a property . So , the biggest property exposure for a renter is typically the '' contents '' that belong to you . A key issue to be aware of is that losses can be settled on both an actual cash value basis , or replacement cost basis . Replacement cost will be more expensive , but the actual cash value of things is depreciating every day you own it . For example look at the computer you are using . Compare it to ones in use 20 years ago . If you have one of the dinosaurs do n't expect to get much for its actual cash value since is essentially depreciated to zero . The other major group of coverages is called Section II of most renters policies and this offers you protection from claims or law suits alleging that you caused others some bodily injury or property damage to others . An easy example to understand is dog bites which are often the second leading cause of homeowner losses for a carrier . If your dog bites somebody it is not going to matter to an individual or the courts whether you own or rent your residence . Essentially you look to your renters policy for not only the coverage but also very importantly the defense costs associated with defending you from such allegations .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
Renters Insurance is designed to cover all your personal property as long as it is listed . Be sure to write down and video each room , if available , to help identify your personal property . Be sure to look at current value vs. replacement value when considering Renters Insurance . Current value will only pay you what your TV is worth today not what it costs to replace it . I would recommend getting the replacement value type with Renters Insurance .
That is a great question ! There are a million people that will line up to help you put together a plan . Some will honestly want to help you , and some will look at you like a wolf looks at a fat , three-legged sheep . Please be careful , and go with someone that comes with high recommendations . Here 's what you can do to get started . Take a few minutes , and decide what retirement looks like to you . Are you fishing , travelling , working , not working , debt free ? Now take a look at your current financial status . What do you need to do between here , and retirement to make that happen ? I tell people that if you want to live at your current standard of living in retirement , then you will want to have squirreled away between 8-10 times what your current salary is . If you want to live better than you are now , then you 've really got to get started . Once you 've got an idea of what you need to save , then you can talk to your HR person at work about company match 401k , or other programs they might offer ; You can talk to your insurance agent or banker and get some ideas , or you can find an advisor that can help you take a look at how to make your vision of retirement a comfortable reality . I hope that gives you an idea , feel free to drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
A renter should have renters insurance to protect your assets , personal property and loss of use . However unless required by a landlord to carry renters insurancethen renters insurance is an option . I recommend you check with your auto insurance provider about obtaining renters insurance policy since in many cases the multi policy discount will off-set the cost of renters insurance .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
end question
start question
annuities
How Much Should I Invest In Annuities ?
It depends on your circumstances . Never invest all of your funds in one vehicle . You need to keep some funds in liquid sources and then diversify the rest according to your individual circumstances , goals and comfort level . Whatever vehicle you choose to do this , invest as much as possible but make sure you understand the limitations and accessibility factors involved . A good independent agent or financial adviser can help you
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
How much should you invest in annuities ? The answer is an individual one based on your concerns about RISK and RETURN . There is n't a formula or set amount that people should follow . Annuities and equities and other places to park money should be divided up based on your risk profile as different investment choices carry different levels of risk . Risk simply means at what point do you stop putting money in places where the return can be zero or your money could be lost ? Everybody is different , annuities for the most part tend to be low risk products . Should you have money there ? I think so , I would , but my understanding of risk and how it effects things may be different than yours .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! They can be , a great investment , depending upon your financial situation . An agent will do what is called a `` suitability study '' with you to determine whether an annuity is right for you . The suitability study is designed to see if the investment in an annuity is a safe investment for you to make - is it financially safe , will it meet your retirement needs , and does it fall within the tolerable amount of risk that you are comfortable with . Annuities are not very flexible for a period of time when it comes to the money that you invest . There are large fees and penalties , and much damage done to the earnings potential if you need to take back money from your annuity in the first years of the contract . This period is called the `` surrender period '' , and may last as long as 10 years . That makes an annuity something that should be seriously considered only if you have some safeguards in place , and have a good cash flow . That said , if it is a suitable investment , then it can be a terrific one to make . Annuities can guarantee an income that you ca n't outlive , and with our increasing lifespans that is a great thing to have ! There are some really good annuity products out there , and the indexed ones have some great earning potential and guarantees . If there are specific questions that you have , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
can life insurance be used as an investment ? Yes , it can . Life insurance has been used as an investment for hundreds of years . While there are some who try very hard to tell you why it 's not an investment , they always seem to never get around to talking about RISK and how there are different levels of risk with different types of investment . Usually , when beating up life insurance , a equity is used with a hypothetical 12 % return on the equity . They never talk about Risk and what role it plays in an investment . Choice A pays 5 % return steady over time , chugs along never goes backward , even in a down marketand has a .001 % chance of failure . Choice B can pay 30 % return in any given year or lose 30 % in any given year . It can go backwards , it can double extremely fast and it has a much higher potential for failure . Which should you own ? How about Both ? One is a safety net which allows you to accept more risk with another choice which can reward you for your efforts . However if it fails to live up to it 's potential , the other safer route keeps you from losing everything . So yes , life insurance can be used as an investment , should it be your only choice ? no , not really , no more than straight equities should be either . Hope this makes sense .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
One key factor when determining how much to invest in an annuity is liquidity . Most annuities come with a contingent deferred sales charge -LRB- CDSC -RRB- . Usually you can withdraw 10 % of your account value per year before triggering the CDSC . However if you wind up having to withdraw more than that amount in the first 5 to 8 years of the contract you could pay a hefty fee . Additionally any deferred earnings taken out prior to age 59 1/2 will come with a 10 % income tax penalty . For these reasons you should have an adequate emergency savings fund before investing in an annuity . You should also limit your annuity investment to funds that you will not need until you are over the age of 59 1/2 .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
In Canada , deferred annuities are considered to be insurance policies . Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIAs -RRB- are similar to Guaranted Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- the interest and principle in both are guaranteed . An example of the Guaranteed Investment Annuity 's `` insurance element '' is the annuity or monthly income . Guaranteed Investment Funds -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , are segregated funds and are similiar to mutual funds.The funds invested in both are at risk . However , Guaranteed Investment Funds , in addition to the annuity or income element offer maturity and death guarantees of 75 % to 100 % . These investment vehicles offer benefits that could prove to be valuable . For more information please visit JPW.ca or contact me via this web site .
Nope . Life insurance can not be an investment . Think about this question for a second . What is the most essential element in an investment ? It is time . Some investments need time to mature . Other investments need time to increase in value . Example : if you are invested in the stock market , and your investment decreases in value , what should you do ? Should you sell ? Of course not . You would sustain the loss only if you redeem the shares at a lower price than when you bought them . What you should do is let them ride , and if properly managed , they should recoup their value , and then some . Over time . If you die , then you could pass this investment on to a family member , and that person could continue to manage the fund . It could continue to grow in value . Over time , during his or her lifetime . Does life insurance buy you this kind of time ? Absolutely not . The product is designed in just the opposite way . It assumes you will run out of time tomorrow . You get the biggest bang for the buck when a death benefit is paid immediately . Somebody could conceivably buy a policy today , pay one monthly premium , and then die . The beneficiary would receive the entire survivor benefit . Would you call something an investment if it required no time to realize value ? Nope . Or that is guaranteed to pay out , for that matter ? Lets talk about that guarantee for a second . Of all the forms of insurance you might buy , the only one you know for sure will pay a benefit is life insurance . This is because you know for sure you are going to die . You could buy medical insurance , but never get sick . You could buy disability insurance , but never get hurt . You could buy auto insurance , but never have a car accident . You could buy professional liability insurance , but never get sued . You could buy home insurance , but never have a fire . And on and on . However , if you hold on to that life insurance policy , you know your survivors will get paid . For sure . So , life insurance is a uniquely wonderful risk management tool that requires no time at all to realize value , and is absolutely guaranteed . With these characteristics , it meets nobodys definition of an investment . Now : I am sure you know that certain life insurance products can produce cash value . Whole life , universal life . Even term can carry a return of premium feature . But these funds are not to be considered investments . They should be seen as added value . As ways to partially offset your cost . As an extra benefit . They make the purchase of a policy extra attractive . But you should never assume that they will have time to grow . They will disappear as soon as a claim is filed and a benefit paid . And that could be tomorrow .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Does Allstate Auto Insurance Cost ?
The price of any brand of auto insurance depends upon several things . Your age is a big factor as well as your gender . Your previous driving record is going to play a big factor in the rates you get . If you have a lot of tickets or accidents you are a higher risk and will pay more . The key to saving on auto insurance is to shop the rate that YOU can qualify for with a dozen different companies or so .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
It depends on the State you live in . Allstate does offer homeowners insurance in most states . They have chosen not to offer homeowners in States where the losses have been too great to sustain . This is true with many companies . Allstate has Auto , Home , and Life insurance . While Allstate is a very good company , it always pays to shop around with your local independent agent before applying to make sure you are getting the best rate .
Yes . Allstate offers multiple lines of insurance . Home , auto , business and life . If you are interested in getting Allstate insurance you should also consider bundling another product with it . The reason I say this is you can get a multi-line discount through Allstate that is pretty good . I am not an Allstate agent , but I have faced some serious competition from them due to the multi-line discount they offer . HOWEVER , I still must recommend contacting an independent agent to shop around for you . There are usually some regional carriers that can offer better prices with better coverage .
Allstate does offer life insurance through Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Company , American Heritage Life Insurance Company , and Allstate Life Insurance Company of New York . They offer both Term and Permanent life insurance products . To obtain a quote you can go to an agency or website selling life insurance through one of the Allstate companies . When using a quote engine , you will be able to compare their rates against the rates of other carriers .
Allstate has life insurance . They really do . Rates are somewhat competitive compared to other major insurers . Allstate is better known for their auto and home insurance prices were are usually competitive in most areas . For an Allstate quote on life insurance , or other carriers with lower rates , a full-time experienced broker can help the best .
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
Allstate does offer life insurance through their subsidiaries : Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Insurance Company and American Heritage Life Insurance Company . To compare quotes from Life Insurance offered by Allstate with other life insurance quotes , you can visit a website with a quote engine that includes Lincoln Benefit Life .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Home insurance can be obtained numerous property and casualty insurance companies . If you currently have auto insurance , you may start with that company as having both auto and homeowners policies with the same company can provide discounts that reduce your overall cost . You can also get quotes online from companies such as State Farm , Farmer 's , Liberty Mutual , and Allstate . While these companies will provide quotes for their own companies , getting a quote from an insurance broker or AAA insurance can provide quotes from several different companies and may provide your best opportunity to find the lowest cost . Be sure to speak to an experienced insurance agent to ensure you have proper coverage . Just because once company has the lowest price does n't make it your best option . Be sure understand deductibles and riders such as earthquake insurance .
Yes . They own Lincoln Benefit Life . The company offers life insurance and annuities through Allstate agents and well as independent life insurance agents -LRB- brokers -RRB- . They are a well respected company with competitive products . While independent agents can offer life insurance products from many companies , Allstate agents will be limited to life insurance and annuities issued by their subsidiaries : Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Insurance Company and American Heritage Life Insurance Company .
The largest auto insurance insurer is State Farm , who reported 8.7 billion in premium last year . Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- GEICO -RRB- recently passed Allstate to become the second largest insurer . GEICO reported 4.8 billion , Allstate 4.6 . 4th is Progressive at 3.9 billion . Rounding out the top 5 is Liberty Mutual , who recently barely passed Farmers , both being at 2.5 billion .
Allstate is indeed a `` good '' auto insurance company . They are a very old and established carriers that offers competitive rates in most areas . Along with State Farm , Farmers , Progressive and Geico , they are very well-knownandrespected . An experienced broker will compare Allstate to dozens of other car insurance companies so you receive the lowest available prices .
Currently , the largest US auto insurance company is State Farm , assuming we use written premiums as the criteria . State Farm has offices throughout the US . Following State Farm is Warren Buffet 's Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- Geico and other companies -RRB- , Allstate , Progressive , Farmers and USAA . Of course , these rankings change fairly often . In fact , Berkshire just recently passed Allstate for the Number 2 position . Many local companies in your area may not be the biggest carriers , but still write a lot of local business . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
For personal auto insurance the largest insurer is Allstate . Allstate has both the largest amount of premium written in the United States , but it also has the most number of insureds . In my opinion this is good and bad . It is good because it is a company that has a branded name to maintain , which means they will strive for good customer service . It also means it has large purse strings , which means it will be less hesitant to pay out on claims . It is bad because they are a national carrier , which means if there is a large disaster elsewhere in the county , it will effect your premiums wherever you reside . Even though large carriers are great , I also recommend looking into some regional carriers because their premiums tend to stay a little more balanced .
Allstate does not underwrite and issue health insurance under their own brand . It is quite possible in your state that they have a marketing arrangement with a health insurance carrier that will actually underwrite , issue , collect premiums and pay claims . Your Allstate agent may or may not be well versed in health insurance options . You should always consider using an independent agent that specializes in health insurance plans .
Geico is primarily an auto insurance company . They would be lumped in with State Farm , Allstate , Farmers , etc. . All of those company WILL sell you life insurance . And they will pay the claim when you die just like all life insurance companies . BUT a wise consumer should always shop thier life insurance with companies that are focused only on life insurance . You will usually find much more attractive choices . Do n't select life insurance by brand name . That 's the biggest mistake you can make and it 's why companies advertise so much . Select by rates and policy features .
Most reputable companies offer renters insurance and it 's very reasonably priced . Call your agent who handles your auto insurance and they should be able to help you . And , if they use the same company for your renters , you should get discounts off of both saving you quite a bit of money . Here are some things to consider : Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- , and your liability . Two things to get right : Use a tool to estimate what it would cost to replace your stuff . Notice I said `` replace '' . You can get insurance that would pay you the depreciated value of your stuff but , in my opinion , it 's worth a little bit more to get your stuff replaced with new . Your agent should have a tool to help you or you can use the one on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like the tool -RRB- . Pick a liability limit that will cover all your assets . I usually wo n't go below $ 300,000 and I usually recommend at least $ 500,000 . The price difference is usually below $ 10/yr . It 's well worth it . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust to do the best for you and take their advice . In the long run , you 'll be happy you did .
I 'm glad you asked this question . I wish more people would before they listen to someone tell them that the lowest price is the best . Nothing could be further from the truth . For a very reasonable and affordable premium , you can get renter 's insurance that works right for you . First , pick the right limit for your personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- . there are some great tools to help you estimate this and the number 's bigger than you think . One of the best is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Next , pick the right settlement option . Actual Cash Value -LRB- ACV -RRB- : The insurance company will depreciate everything you lost and write you a check for that amount up to the policy limit . Replacement Cost : The insurance company will pay to replace the stuff you lost with new , up to the policy limit . I usually sell replacement cost because most people would rather have new stuff . Keep in mind , if you choose replacement cost , your limit should be higher than if you choose ACV . Make sure you have broad form or special form coverage on your personal property . This will ensure you have coverage for theft . Lastly , pick the right liability limit . If an agent tries to sell you a liability limit of $ 100,000 , run away and find a new agent . If you get sued , it will likely be for a lot more than $ 100,000 . Here 's the worst part , the premium difference between a limit of $ 100,000 and $ 500,000 could be as low as $ 9 per year -LRB- that 's what it is with my company -RRB- . The most important thing you should know is that a good agent will take the time to find out about you and the things you own . Then , he/she will put together the right coverage to protect you . If it costs a little more , pay it . An extra $ 50 premium might save you thousands at claim time .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How To Set Up A 401K ?
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is a tax favored retirement program established by an employer for the benefit of the employees . Individuals can establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA -RRB- to accomplish the same for their retirement in a tax favored manner . The investments for their 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or an IRA may be available outside the plan , some , annuities , retain some of their tax advantages and can assist a person in augmenting their plan to retire .
How to set up a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- ? First before you decide on a 401k as your retirement plan , make sure it makes sense . Most people know the name 401k and sort of apply it as all retirement plans , but actually it 's one of many plans out there that an employer can use . The big thing I would suggest anyone look at before establishing a retirement plan is the cost of the plan itself . Typically a 401k will have fees for all people under the plan , participating or not . You will have discrimination tests to be run on the plan and contributions . Before you commit to a particular plan , check and see what the plan cost to operate . If your costs are greater than your returns , is it a good choice ?
That is a great question ! If you want to set up a 401k plan as an employer , the brokerage company should easily walk you through the process . If you were talking about setting something up for yourself , you mean an IRA , or `` individual retirement account '' . There are several options here , and you would really want to speak with an advisor before jumping into one . Drop me a line , if you 'd like . Thanks for asking !
How to set up a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- ? First before you decide on a 401k as your retirement plan , make sure it makes sense . Most people know the name 401k and sort of apply it as all retirement plans , but actually it 's one of many plans out there that an employer can use . The big thing I would suggest anyone look at before establishing a retirement plan is the cost of the plan itself . Typically a 401k will have fees for all people under the plan , participating or not . You will have discrimination tests to be run on the plan and contributions . Before you commit to a particular plan , check and see what the plan cost to operate . If your costs are greater than your returns , is it a good choice ?
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 59 1/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
It depends on your personal financial goals and tolerance of risk . It is best to consult a financial adviser who will take the time to discuss the advantages of both and how they relate to your personal situation . No two peoples situations are alike . Depending on how the 401k is set up you may possibly stand to receive greater gains than a basic Roth IRA but there may also be a greater chance of loss . There are also a variety of ways these can be set up , so it would depend on the details of the products being used .
Can you rollover your 401k to a roth ira ? Not really no , there is no provision that allows you to roll the values in your 401k into a Roth without tax penalties . If you did something like this you would need to cash out your 401k which would be taxed at an income tax level combined with your current income , along with a 10 % penalty . So you would be losing roughly 40 % or more of you 401k values . Not something easily made up no matter how good an investment picker you might be .
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
How to set up a retirement plan ? The first thing you want to do is figure out your options . If your a business owner than their are tax advantages you can have for setting up a retirement plan for your employees . Some choices are 401k , IRA , SEP , Roth IRA , life insurance , pension plan . Once you know and learn which retirement plan you want to implement than the next step is paper work . You should always speak to a professional retirement planner .
Why roll over a 401k into a Roth IRA ? Well I ca n't honestly think of a good answer to do this . In order to do this transfer , if you qualify for a Roth in the first place , would require you to cash out your 401k and combined with your current income , might place you in a higher tax bracket , as well as the extra 10 % penalty for early redemption , and possible redemption fees from the 401k as well . So you might be looking at a `` loss '' of anywhere from 35-45 % of the value of your 401k just from taxes and early redemption penalties . What you would have to figure is how many years would it take you to get back to even ? That would include this loss and the loss of gain years spent getting back to even . How about if you qualify , owning both ? Use new money for your Roth . Yes , it will be taxed , but it wo n't be taxed , penalized and require years to recover the market loss . Have both .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 59 1/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 59 1/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 59 1/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 70 1/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 59 1/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
401K plans have been one of the primary ways people who work save for retirement . It is what is known as a qualified plan meaning that it is subject to government enforced rules and regulations regarding how money goes into it , how much can go in , how it comes out and how much at one time . Employers offer these plans and agree to put in a certain amount -LRB- in some cases , not all -RRB- so that an employee can grow their nest egg while working . The funds grow tax deferred -LRB- no taxes due till funds are distributed to employee -RRB- , typically have options as to where you will invest them and traditionally accumulate over time . You can ask your employer about their 401K plan if they offer one . You usually have to work with them for a few months or a year before you beome eligible to join .
A good independent agent who works with retirement planning can help you set up your retirement plan . Depending on your needs and situation , you may choose to set up a simple IRA qualified annuity . If you have access to a 401k at work you have a great source to help get you started . You need the help of someone familiar with retirement planning .
That is a great question ! If you want to set up a 401k plan as an employer , the brokerage company should easily walk you through the process . If you were talking about setting something up for yourself , you mean an IRA , or `` individual retirement account '' . There are several options here , and you would really want to speak with an advisor before jumping into one . Drop me a line , if you 'd like . Thanks for asking !
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
The appropriate answer here is '' anywhere you want to invest your 401k assets . '' I mean who are you ? What are your goals ? What have you been investing your 401k in ? How can any adviser tell you where to invest after retirement without knowing you ? Sorry , but I think this is a dumb question . Usually , people roll 401k assets over into an IRA . Some employers allow you to stay put and keep your current investments .
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
That is a great question ! Simply put , a 401k rollover is what you call the action of taking the funds from one 401k and moving them -LRB- or `` rolling them over '' -RRB- into another 401k fund , or similar retirement vehicle . This has to be done in a very timely fashion , or there are tax consequences , and is most commonly done when you switch employers , and want to keep funding the 401k . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Co-Pays ?
Original Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B does not cover co-pays , deductibles or coinsurance . In fact , it covers only about 80 % of your healthcare costs . The remaining 20 % is your responsibility and is limitless unless you have a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- . Depending on which Medicare Supplement Plan you have it can pay all or most of those costs . For more information about Medicare or to Compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online visit our website at SummitMedigap.com .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans available to Medicare Beneficiaries . They include Plan A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N with Plan F also offering a high-deductible plan . The most popular standardized Medigap Plans are F , G , and N. Plan F will cover all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , co-insurance or deductibles for Medicare covered costs . If you choose the high-deductible Plan F , you must pay for Medicare covered costs up to the deductible amount of $ 2,140 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- before your Medigap Plan F will pay anything . Plan G will cover all your Medicare approved charges after you have satisfied the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Once the small deductible is met , Medigap Plan G acts like Plan F and covers the co-pays , co-insurance and deductibles that Original Medicare does not cover . Plan N covers 100 % of the Part B co-insurance , except for a small co-pay for some office visits -LRB- never more than $ 20 per visit -RRB- and up to a co-pay of $ 50 for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted as an inpatient -RRB- . You are also responsible for satisfying the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . If you have further questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Original Medicare Part A & B do not come with Co-Pays . You are , however , responsible for deductibles and co-insurance . Co-pays are mostly associated with Medicare Advantage Plans and Prescription Drug Plans . The co-pays do have a wide range from one Plan to the next , so it is always a good idea to review the Outline of Coverage for the Plan you have or may be considering . If you have a Medigap Plan -LRB- also known as Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- , there is one standardized plan that does have co-pays . With Plan N , the customer is responsible for co-pays for doctor visits . The co-pay will not be more than $ 20 for an office visit . Plan N also requires a $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit . This co-pay is waived if you are admitted into the hospital .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
Medigap or Medicare Supplement insurance is private health insurance established to help supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B. Meaning , it will help pay some of the health care costs not covered by Original Medicare -LRB- co-pays , deductibles , co-insurance -RRB- . When you have a Medigap Policy , Medicare will pay it 's share of Medicare approved amounts for your covered health care costs . Then your Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- pays its share . There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans -LRB- A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N -RRB- with varying benefits . Plan F is the most popular because it covers all Medicare approved charges and you do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you 've satisfied the small annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . WEBSITELINK Please feel free to contact me regarding your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with Medigap benefit and quote information to help you make an informed decision .
Medigap policies serve as a supplement to Original Medicare . Original medicare is an 80/20 plan , where Medicare pays 80 % of the approved charges . The beneficiary is typically responsible for the 20 % co-insurance as well as co-pays and deductibles that come with Medicare Parts A & B . The Medigap policy is designed to pick up the 20 % Medicare does n't cover in exchange for a monthly premium payable to the carrier selected . The most comprehensive Medigap policy is Plan F , which covers all of the Part A & B deductible , co-insurance and co-pays , so when the beneficiary goes to receive care their is zero out-of-pocket costs . Some plans may also provide benefits like foreign travel as well as a gym membership as part of your regular plan . Please note : when purchasing a Medigap Policy , you need to add a Stand-Alone Prescription Drug Plan to satisfy your requirement as a Medicare Beneficiary to have Part D - Prescription Drug Coverage met .
If you would like to have peace of mind knowing that the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved charges will be covered by insurance -LRB- instead of your bank account -RRB- , then Medigap insurance is absolutely worth it . Medicare Beneficiaries with Original Medicare Part A and Part B leave themselves vulnerable to the ` gaps ' that Medicare does not cover -LRB- co-insurance , co-pays and deductibles -RRB- . This can add up quickly . For example , a $ 5,000 procedure would leave you with a bill for $ 1,000 -LRB- 20 % co-insurance -RRB- . A $ 20,000 procedure would bill you for $ 4,000 -LRB- 20 % co-insurance -RRB- . You see where this is going ... $ 50,000 operation means you 're stuck with a $ 10,000 hospital bill . Not to mention -- if you have a chronic illness , twenty-percent co-insurance can put a huge burden on your budget . I have spoken to Medicare Beneficiaries who are paying the 20 % co-insurance . Some do n't mind because they have n't had any health issues , but others do have health issues and did n't realize they could n't get a Medigap Plan once they were sick . Meaning , you are not always guaranteed a Medigap Plan whenever you want to buy one . If you are not in your initial Open Enrollment Period or another Guaranteed Issue Situation , you 'll have to qualify medically . If I can assist you with your personal situation , please feel free to contact me .
Plan F covers the 20 % of Medicare approved medical expenses that Medicare does n't cover . There are No co-pays or deductibles . The plan covers : Part A hospital coinsurance , 365 additional hospital reserve days Benefit for blood Part B Co-Insurance Skilled nursing facility co-insurance Part A deductible Part B deductible Part B excess Foreign travel expense Preventative care co-insurance with NO out-of-pocket expense Plan G might also be a great option , depending on your situation . Make sure you are working with an agent that shops all the companies available to you in your area .
In short , Medigap does not cover non-medically necessary procedures -LRB- e.g. cosmetic surgery -RRB- and items such as routine dental work and eye exams . Individual dental insurance plans and vision insurance plans will cover the latter programs - elective cosmetic surgery is generally going to be paid 100 % out-of-pocket no matter what . Medigap plans pay benefits when you have a Medicare-approved service claim . Please note , each Medigap plan features different benefits so the question can expand from there as not every Medigap plan covers every available Medigap benefit . For example , plan F covers each Medigap benefit at 100 % from day 1 -LRB- and 80 % for foreign travel emergency care , up to plan lifetime limits of $ 50,000 -RRB- . Plan N covers each Medigap benefit at 100 % from day 1 except for coverage of the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 and 2015 -RRB- , Part B excess charges , and you have to pay a co-pay when you go to the doctor -LRB- up to $ 20 co-pay -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 co-pay -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for further help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
Medigap policies came into being because Medicare does n't cover everything . And what it does cover , it does so with deductibles and co-pays . The deductible for a hospital pay is over $ 1200/stay . The co-pays for physicians services and tests are about 20 % . Medigap plans came into being to protect the consumer from high unexpected out-of-pocket costs .
If you want to help fill in the gaps that Original Medicare does n't cover , then you should consider buying Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance . A Medigap Policy can help pay your share of Medicare-covered services -LRB- the co-insurance , co-pays and deductibles -RRB- . Generally , Original Medicare Part A and B only cover 80 % percent of your health care costs , leaving you with the remaining 20 % to pay out of your pocket -- unless you have a Medigap Plan . If you have a significant health issue arise , twenty percent can get hit your budget pretty hard . A $ 3,000 procedure will cost you $ 600 in co-insurance . A $ 10,000 procedure will cost you $ 1,000 . Surgery costing $ 100,000 will leave you with a hefty $ 20,000 bill . Some people believe they should wait until their health dictates a need for Medigap insurance . Unfortunately , waiting is not the best option as you may not qualify for Medigap insurance once you `` need '' it . Medigap insurance companies are not bound to the Affordable Care Act , so they can ask health questions -LRB- unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation or your initial Open Enrollment period -RRB- . Your Medigap application will have to be approved through the medical underwriting department . To find out if you are in your initial Open Enrollment or a Guaranteed Issue situation , you can work with an agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance or call Medicare directly . If you do qualify , you 'll be able to buy a Medigap Plan in your state and not be required to answer any health questions . If I can assist you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
There is Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement Plan B. Medicare Part B is provided by the Federal government . Medicare Supplement Plan B is offered by insurance companies . Part B of Medicare covers doctor office and outpatient visits . Medicare Supplement Plan B provides coverage for some of the cost Medicare does not pay for when you to the doctor or hospital -LRB- deductibles , co -- insurance and co-pays .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Medicare Part B covers certain doctor 's services , outpatient care , medical supplies including medical equipment , some preventative services such as flu shots , ambulance , mental health , and limited outpatient prescription drugs . There is a co-pay required for benefits received under Medicare Part B. Medicare supplement plans can cover the co-pay and pay for things that Medicare Part A and B do not cover .
When qualification is met for admittance to a nursing home Medicare bed , Medicare will pay all charges for a semiprivate room for the first 20 days -LRB- minus conveniences such as phone or TV -RRB- . For the next 80 days the nursing home resident must pay a co-pay . In 2013 , the co-pay is $ 148 . After that , Medicare does not pay for nursing home stay unless a new 100 day benefit period .
Deductibles are the amount of money you have to pay out of your own pocket before the insurance `` kicks in '' . For instance , if you have a $ 1000 deductible and your bill from the hospital is $ 3000 , you would pay the first $ 1,000 , then the insurance would pay their agreed upon portion of the remaining $ 2,000 . Co-insurance is similar to a co-pay in that it is your portion of the bill that is owed . The difference is that a co-pay is a set amount , say $ 20 per office visit where a co-insurance is a percentage of the bill .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does My Husband Have To Be On My Auto Insurance If He Does n't Drive The Car ?
Here in CT , a licensed driver needs to be either rated or excluded on an auto policy . The tough part is that although this can work in many situations , a spousal situation is not one of them . It may be possible if each of you have a car registered in your own name and insured on separate policies , this you really neeed to check with your Insurance Professional
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
When buying life insurance for your husband , first gather his health information : the medications he takes , his height and weight , any weight loss of over 10 pounds in the past year , and a history of health conditions he has had -LRB- including the year he was diagnosed -RRB- . If he has had a bankruptcy , felony , DUI , or other risk factors , try to recall the date it occurred and/or was discharged . Ask your husband whether he objects to taking an exam . Then , using all this information , shop for his best rate . He will need to complete and sign the application as the insured . Either of you can own the policy . The policy owner and person making the payments will also sign the application . If the policy does not need an exam , your husband may need to do a phone interview with a representative for the life insurance company . If it is a medically underwritten policy , it will require an exam to be done in your home or place of your husband 's choice . Once approved , your husband will need to sign some delivery requirements to put the policy into effect . If you are the policy owner , you will need to sign them , as well .
This is an extremely sensitive topic . The death of a spouse can be life-shattering . A suicide can make it almost unbearable . Not too long ago a friend and client committed suicide . She had been going through a tough spell emotionally , and then almost out of the blue took her own life . Left behind a loving husband and three young boys . Very , very sad . I expedited the claim , as is my usual practice . This job is usually tough , and the fact that her family and mine are friendly made it really hard . My friend , her surviving husband , was so upset he could n't even complete the claim form . I did it for him . The insurance carrier paid the claim as the policy was over two years old . That is standard practice . Will they never pay before then ? I can say that I know of a case with a very high-profile insured who apparently committed suicide just a year after his policies were issued -LRB- he had several - lots of coverage -RRB- . The carriers , of course , initially refused to pay . The insured 's lawyers eventually convinced them to do so : why would they want the bad publicity of not paying a claim ? Will they always pay after two years ? My own feeling is yes , generally , but suspicious circumstances may interfere . If the carrier has reason to believe that this tragic event had been planned to take place right after the two-year anniversary . . Sometimes life is like a mystery novel .
How much auto insurance is enough ? I once heard a story from a gentleman that may answer your question . He told me about an accident he had when he was younger . At the time of the accident he did n't own much and had very little in savings , so he was taking a chance by owning and driving a car without insurance . He figured sice he did n't own much and since the car was an old oil burner , he did n't need it . Then one day he was in a hurry and was trying to beat a yellow traffic light before it changed to red , when he clipped the front end of another car coming through the intersection in front of him . He said that when he came to , he checked himself out , then searched for the other driver . When he found that both he and the other driver were uninjured , he was thrilled . As he looked around more closely he found himself inside a building specifically a liquor store and was right in the middle of the Scotch aisle . When the dust settled the other driver had claimed only $ 15,000 to replace his car ... . but the store owner sued him for over $ 500,000 in damages to his store and contents . The judge awarded a total of $ 515,000 in a damage award and the old gentleman told me he was still working to pay off the judgement now 10 years later . The answer to your question is buy as much coverage as you can afford . Do n't be fooled by some auto insurace brokers when they try to sell you the state minimums as you could be paying for that cheap policy in the years to come !
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Auto insurance follows the car . The car is assigned to a household -LRB- address . -RRB- All the drivers in the household are considered when the insurance company issues the policy . Technically this would mean that a husband and wife living in the same household could not have separate policies . It does happen particularly when one has a very bad driving record and the preferred company refuses to insure that driver . Other substandard insurance companies will cover the driver in which case you have husbands and wives insured separately with different companies . The driver with the bad record is probably excluded from the car assigned to the driver with a good record .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
You can take out a life insurance on your ex-husband as long as your ex-husband agrees to having you take out a life insurance policy on him . He will need to sign the application as the Insured person , even if you are the Owner and Payer of the policy . Also , there must be a financial reason for you to have life insurance on your ex-husband . E.g. . He pays child support or alimony that would be lost if he passed .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
I am working on a case right now in which my client has applied for 11 policies . Here is the breakdown : He is a partner in one business with two other fellows . They have just completed a buy-sell agreement and are funding the agreement with life insurance . Per the advice of their accountant and their attorney , they are purchasing several policies to cover both the current and the anticipated future value of the business . One policy will be owned by the business , and four other policies will be owned by a trust . That gives us five policies so far . My client is also a partner in a second business , with another fellow . They are following the same funding strategy . That business will own one policy , and the trust will own an additional four . Our count is now up to 10 policies . But these policies take care only of business needs . My client is also married with children . He needs life insurance for family protection . So he is purchasing yet another policy for their benefit . That gives us 11 . The underwriter is fine with this set up . My client can justify the need for all policies financially . All policies have been deemed appropriate with regard to the financial needs of the business and the financial needs of his family . And you know what ? He could buy more if he wanted to . Lets suppose he supported a number of charities . They could be religious , or social service , or political . He could take out a separate policy for each of their benefit . Five charities , five more policies . But we have another consideration . What if his net worth is over $ 5 million , and he wants to preserve his estate for his heirs ? What if he wants to avoid forcing his family to liquidate his assets just to pay Uncle Sams estate tax bill ? He could buy life insurance to cover the tax bill . Another policy . We are not done yet :-RRB- . What if his parents were financially dependent on him . It happens . What if his premature demise would put them in financial straits ? He could buy life insurance on himself for their benefit , so they could be well taken care of . Do you realize that in this scenario , this one client could take out 20 or so policies ? And it would all be financially justified and appropriate . How do you like that ? Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Michelle in New Jersey , What a sad story ! I 'm sure everyone sympathizes with you as I do , however there are rules that govern pretty much everything as you indicated that you are aware . So the answer to your question : When is a life insurance policy considered `` In Force '' ? is that the policy is in force when all the delivery requirements are met and the first premium is paid . In this case the policy was in force , but then lapsed thus it was no longer in force . Your husband applied for reinstatement , which reinstatement was approved according to your account , however the premium had not yet been paid , nor the approval been given by the insurer when your husband died . Therefore the policy was not in force on your husband 's death and the insurer is not obligated to pay the benefit . Even if your husband had submitted the reinstatement premium with his application for reinstatement , since the company had not approved or accepted the reinstatement before your husband died the policy did not meet the requirements for inforceability . Had he submitted the premium and the company accepted and approved the reinstatement before he died then the policy would have been in force and the company would be obligated to pay the benefit .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
It all depends on what he wants the insurance for . Husbands tend to have a lot that their income is dependent on -LRB- household , family , college dreams for children , etc -RRB- and as such the loss of his income can have devastating effects on a family . The amount of insurance he should have will depend on how much he currently earns and how much he has the potential to contribute to the continuation of the dreams for his family . I would suggest that both Husband and wife sit down with an Insurance Professional and come to a dollar amount of coverage they feel they would need to adequately fulfill their family wishes .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Best Life Insurance In The USA ?
what is the best life insurance in the USA ? The one that is in force when needed . That 's the best policy because it is in force and will pay your claim . What could be better than that ? There is no single `` best '' because there is no single need . Best can be many things because there are many people and many needs .
There is no one best life insurance company or type of policy in the USA . Companies are rated by agencies -LRB- AM Best and Moody 's , to name a couple -RRB- , and those help you ascertain the financial strength of each company . The type of policy that is best , depends on the need it is to cover .
Ratings are not as relevant as they once used to be . What is important , is how the policies you are looking to buy perform over time . And the best performing are n't always the best policies . If you can find an agent who really understands what it is he or she does , to me that is the most important aspect . They can guide you into finding whatever it is you seek . These days there are just too many choices for the average consumer to sort through . As agents it can be a daunting experience to match the right company/policy to the client . After 20 years , I speak from the heart . I love what I do , and I love to help the public figure things out . That is what matters most to me . Find an agent who cares and you have a winner .
Objectively , there is no one best life insurance company in the USA , although some people certainly have personal opinions about which life insurance companies they like best . There are four main rating agencies that people consult to review the financial information of life insurance companies , and to see what they are rated . These rating agencies are AM Best , Standard and Poor 's , Moody 's , and Fitch . Some also look at Weiss and others . Looking at a database of complaints against the company can also influence what someone considers to be the best life insurance company in the USA .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
There is no one best life insurance policy in the USA . That is like asking what is the best car in the USA . The type of life insurance -LRB- or car -RRB- that people buy depends on their budget , what they are using it for , what company they like , and whether they want to keep it for a long time or trade it off in the near future . A good life insurance agent will gather your personal health details , financial information , and desires , and find the best policy for you as an individual person .
The answer to your question can vary from health insurance carrier to health insurance carrier and may also be a function of whether you are covered under a self-insured plan with an employer who has made specific provisions for coverage outside of the USA . To the surprise -LRB- sometimes very unfortunate surprise -RRB- of many travelers , many health insurance plans do not provide coverage outside of the USA . You will really need to look at your certificate of coverage , check with your HR person or insurance agent to determine what your specific policy will do in such situations . I would start out with the conservative assumption that you would not be covered for a health care need outside of the USA and then you can only be pleasantly surprised . There are specialty health insurance policies for international health insurance coverage that can be purchased to provide protection to persons traveling or staying overseas for some period of time . If your domestic health insurance policy does not cover you outside of the USA or provides only limited coverage you may want to consider purchasing one of these specialty policies before going outside of the country .
what is the best life insurance in the USA ? The one that is in force when needed . That 's the best policy because it is in force and will pay your claim . What could be better than that ? There is no single `` best '' because there is no single need . Best can be many things because there are many people and many needs .
Medicare is a federal program . The benefits are the same regardless of the state in which you live . Incidentally , it isnt the same should you travel outside the USA or reside outside the USA . This produces a dilemma for medical providers as the cost of services isnt the same everywhere . In some places Medicare payments are deemed adequate . In others , they are inadequate .
There is no one best life insurance company or type of policy in the USA . Companies are rated by agencies -LRB- AM Best and Moody 's , to name a couple -RRB- , and those help you ascertain the financial strength of each company . The type of policy that is best , depends on the need it is to cover .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Monumental Life Insurance Company joined with Life Investors Financial Group , Inc , to form Transamerica Agency Network , Inc , in 2011 . Monumental Life Insurance Company was founded in 1858 . The Aegon USA Group , of which Monumental Life is now a part , was rated A + by AM Best recently . To compare Monumental Life insurance quotes from those from other companies , visit a website with that offers instant quotes .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
The basic reason for life insurance is love . Do you want your children to pay more or less than you for life insurance ? Do you think they will ever need life insurance ? Would their premature death create financial problems ? Do you want to protect their ability to buy life insurance ? Do you want a vehicle that will help them accumulate cash for the future ? One hundred years ago , parents across the USA bought life insurance on their children .
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company was established in Massachusetts in 1862 . John Hancock went from a mutual company to a stock company in the year 2000 , and was renamed John Hancock Financial Services , Inc. . Manulife Financial Corp -LRB- based in Cananda -RRB- acquired John Hancock Financial in 2004 . John Hancock Life Insurance Company now writes life insurance in the USA . It is a highly respected carrier for life insurance and other financial products .
USAA 's website states that their long term care insurance is underwritten by John Hancock Life Insurance Company -LRB- USA -RRB- . USAA Life General Agency -LRB- known in CA and NY as USAA Life and Health Insurance Agency -RRB- acts as an agent to provide long term care insurance to its members . Plans are not available in all states .
The traditional way to compare home policies is to take the declarations page to another agent and ask for a comparison . You might want to do that with several agents . There are some websites that purport to compare coverages and prices . The issue isnt which company has the lowest premium but which policy provides the coverage that you require . If you paid less and the company failed to cover a loss you would have made quite a poor investment . It is better to know what coverages are available and get advice on which are appropriate . I live in an arid part of the USA . However , one of the largest floods in history took place right here . I might want flood insurance even if I am miles from a stream . This and other coverages might come to bear and evaluating the risk is what your agent can help you do . If you have a policy and in twenty years pay $ 200 more than some other company , if you have the right coverages because an agent went over the policy carefully with you , you are the winner , not the loser . Good coverage means a good nights sleep !
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
Yes . There is absolutely no requirement that a person be a citizen to buy life insurance . Each company makes its own decisions on requirements , but citizenship is not one of them . So long as you are in the country legally , you can buy life insurance . Different ID 's are required by different carriers , but rest assured that if your age and health warrant it , you can buy life insurance on yourself here in the USA . Love to help . Thank you . GARY LANE .
As one of the two largest life insurance companies in the US Prudential sells a lot of whole life insurance . At one time there were towns in the USA where every household had at least one prudential policy . Prudential was a leader in an old form of whole life called debit insurance . A man would come to your home each week and collect the premium , normally less than $ 5 .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Where Is My Health Insurance Accepted ?
This is such a broad question . There is no way to answer without knowing additional details of your policy . Do you have an HMO , PPO , or another type of policy . HMO 's typically restrict you to providers at their facilities with exceptions being made for unusual situations . PPO 's will typically have a network of preferred providers covered under on copay and out of network providersunder a different copay and reimbursement level . You shouldhave been issued an insurance card with a number for you to contact with questions aboutyour plan .
You first want to research the types of benefits available under a Medigap plan , decide which of these benefits you want , and then select the Medigap policy that meets these needs . All of the Medigap plans are standardized so the benefits under a given plan is the EXACT same from every carrier . So how do they differentiate themselves in that type of marketplace ? They feature different rates , rating methods - community rated , issue age rated , and attained age rated , and value added services -LRB- e.g. UHC plan members can get discounts for vision or dental services and access to the senior sneakers program through AARP -RRB- . A lot of people think `` Why do n't I just get a plan F ? All of the benefits available are included in that plan ! '' While this is true , this plan is also going to be the most expensive . If you 're on a fixed income , you may want to try to keep your cost down . Therefore , a different plan may be more appropriate for you . For example , a plan G offers all of the same benefits as a plan F , except for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 for 2014 -RRB- . However , a plan G is going to be cheaper than a plan F -LRB- and usually by a good margin -RRB- . Plan N can also reduce premiums by a substantial margin and offer great coverage as well - the difference from plans F & G being a small copay is due when you go to the doctor -LRB- up to a $ 20 copay -RRB- or the hospital -LRB- up to a $ 50 copay -RRB- and excess charges are not covered . Plan N is most useful for someone who 's doctors accept Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- when accepting assignment , a doctor accepts the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full and can not bill you an excess charge -RRB- . Another major point to keep in mind is where your health is now and where it may be in the future because you might not be able to switch to another Medigap plan later if your health drastically changed down the line , you may not be able to qualify for a new plan if medical underwriting is required . The rating method a carrier uses is an important factor to consider here . You also need to find out which carriers offer the plan in your area . Remember to keep in mind that not every carrier offers every plan . Because there are many health care plan options available to seniors , it 's most helpful for you to work with an experienced broker who can guide you through all of these steps . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
In Connecticut , where I have been licensed since 1985 , if an insurance company needs to have proof of prior continuous insurance coverage , the declaration sheet is the preferred and universally accepted document to certify such proof . In fact , most companies co n't accept just an Insurance ID Card because they are not considered to be as strong a document . If by chance you let your old policy lapse so that there is a gap in coverage , that might be the cause of the problem . There is no reason I can think of in my experience why a valid in force declaration sheet would not be acceptable as proof of prior coverage . You could go to the Insurance Commissioner as previously suggested , but it also may be worth reconsidering your move in the first place .
The Part B Excess Charge is the amount above what Medicare approves for a procedure or office visit . Providers can bill you for excess charges if they do not accept Medicare Assignment . Because the doctor does not accept Medicare Assignment , he or she is able to charge an additional amountthis is the Part B Excess Charge . The doctor , however , is limited to charging 15 % over the Medicare approved amount . To avoid excess charges it is important to understand Medicare Assignment . This term refers to providers who WILL accept full payment by Medicare . If a doctor does not accept Medicare Assignment , he or she IS allowed to bill you for Part B Excess Charges . To find out if your doctor accepts Medicare Assignment you can always call their office or visit Medicare.gov and locate the physician information . If you do n't like the idea of paying Part B excess charges , you can consider purchasing a Medicare Supplement plan to cover that expense . In 2014 , there are two plans -LRB- F , G -RRB- that have that benefit . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is much misinformation spread about this topic . The former answer at least implies that a doctor can just `` decide '' whether to accept Medicare assignment or not . It is important to understand that this is only true if a doctor has signed a non-participating agreement with Medicare . Most doctors -LRB- approx . 97 % -RRB- are contracted with Medicare as `` participating physicians '' , and as such must accept Medicare assignment , i.e. the Medicare approved amount for the service as payment in full . Participating physicians are not permitted to bill any Part B excess charges . Next , the former example given is simply incorrect : `` if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . '' The truth is that if the doctor is contracted as `` non-participating '' with Medicare and chooses not to accept assignment , they are first penalized 5 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- $ 400 x 5 % = $ 20 penalty -RRB- . Medicare will only reimburse $ 380 for this example -LRB- $ 400 - $ 20 penalty -RRB- . The doctor can bill you up to 15 % of the $ 380 as an excess charge in this example , or $ 57 . In not accepting assignment , the doctor may bill/collect $ 437 -LRB- $ 380 Medicare reimbursement + $ 57 excess charge -RRB- . This gives the doctor the opportunity to receive $ 437 instead of the $ 400 Medicare assignment , which in effect is a 9.25 % increase in revenue . Non-Participating physicians can decide whether to accept Medicare assignment on a case by case basis , and often do accept assignment , because if they do not , Medicare reimburses the claim to the beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- , and the physician then must collect the reimbursement and the excess charge from the consumer in full . This adds administrative and collection costs that many non-Par physicians do not want to deal with . The former answer states that If you live in one of the states banning Part B excess charges , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . But the truth is that Part B excess charges are not a concern , let alone a major concern , regardless of what state you are living in . For the reasons stated , Part B excess charges are rarely billed . Ask any Medicare beneficiary when was the last time they received a claim payment directly from Medicare -LRB- required if doctor was non-Par and refused assignment -RRB- . You will be hard pressed to find anyone answering yes .
Plan F is the most popular Medigap plan . Before buying one , you first want to research the types of benefits available under a Medigap plan , decide which of these benefits you want , and then select the Medigap policy that meets these needs . All of the Medigap plans are standardized so the benefits under a given plan is the EXACT same from every carrier . So how do they differentiate themselves in that type of marketplace ? They feature different rates , rating methods - community rated , issue age rated , and attained age rated , and value added services -LRB- e.g. UHC plan members can get discounts for vision or dental services and access to the senior sneakers program through AARP -RRB- . A lot of people think `` Why do n't I just get a plan F ? All of the benefits available are included in that plan ! '' While this is true , this plan is also going to be the most expensive . If you 're on a fixed income , you may want to try to keep your cost down . Therefore , a different plan may be more appropriate for you . For example , a plan G offers all of the same benefits as a plan F , except for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 for 2014 -RRB- . However , a plan G is going to be cheaper than a plan F -LRB- and usually by a good margin -RRB- . Plan N can also reduce premiums by a substantial margin and offer great coverage as well - the difference from plans F & G being a small copay is due when you go to the doctor -LRB- up to a $ 20 copay -RRB- or the hospital -LRB- up to a $ 50 copay -RRB- and excess charges are not covered . Plan N is most useful for someone who 's doctors accept Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- when accepting assignment , a doctor accepts the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full and can not bill you an excess charge -RRB- . Another major point to keep in mind is where your health is now and where it may be in the future because you might not be able to switch to another Medigap plan later if your health drastically changed down the line , you may not be able to qualify for a new plan if medical underwriting is required . The rating method a carrier uses is an important factor to consider here . You also need to find out which carriers offer the plan in your area . Remember to keep in mind that not every carrier offers every plan . As there are many health care plan options available to seniors , it 's most helpful for you to work with an experienced broker who can guide you through all of these steps . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You first want to research the types of benefits available under a Medigap plan , decide which of these benefits you want , and then select the Medigappolicy that meets these needs . All of the Medigap plans are standardized so the benefits under a given plan is the EXACT same from every carrier . So how do they differentiate themselves in that type of marketplace ? They feature different rates , rating methods - community rated , issue age rated , and attained age rated , and value added services -LRB- e.g. UHC plan members can get discounts for vision or dental services and access to the senior sneakers program through AARP -RRB- . A lot of people think `` Why do n't I just get a plan F ? All of the benefits available are included in that plan ! '' While this is true , this plan is also going to be the most expensive . If you 're on a fixed income , you may want to try to keep your cost down . Therefore , a different plan may be more appropriate for you . For example , a plan G offers all of the same benefits as a plan F , except for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 for 2014 -RRB- . However , a plan G is going to be cheaper than a plan F -LRB- and usually by a good margin -RRB- . Plan N can also reduce premiums by a substantial margin and offer great coverage as well - the difference from plans F & G being a small copay is due when you go to the doctor -LRB- up to a $ 20 copay -RRB- or the hospital -LRB- up to a $ 50 copay -RRB- and excess charges are not covered . Plan N is most useful for someone who 's doctors accept Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- when accepting assignment , a doctor accepts the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full and can not bill you an excess charge -RRB- . Another major point to keep in mind is where your health is now and where it may be in the future because you might not be able to switch to another Medigap plan later if your health drastically changed down the line , you may not be able to qualify for a new plan if medical underwriting is required . The rating method a carrier uses is an important factor to consider here . You also need to find out which carriers offer the plan in your area . Remember to keep in mind that not every carrier offers every plan . Because there are many health care plan options available to seniors , it 's most helpful for you to work with an experienced , independent Medigap insurance broker who can guide you through all of these steps and help you determine which plan is the most suitable option for you.I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let me share my experience.I 'm a licensed fee-based -LRB- accept no commissions -RRB- insurance consultant who has studied insurance , obtained a number of industry designations , owned and operated a general insurance agency for nearly forty years and helped thousands of insurance consumers with their insurance questions . I have long harbored ill will toward GEICO and other insurers who chose not to do business with independent agents . I believe their sales staff -LRB- and that of other insurers selling direct to the public -RRB- are trained to sell what the insurer wants to sell ; not what the consumer really needs . But I recently sought to purchase auto insurance for myself and checked out a number of on-line insurance offerings . GEICO 's premiums were one third of those indicated by E-surance , Progressive , and several others . The application process and live discussion with a sales person was cordial , professional and non-threatening . I was able to access my coverage information on-line , pay premiums directly and obtain insurance cards.Actually my experience was better than any I 've had with any independent agent . My conclusion , it is still important to know what you need and want . It is you against a large insurer and that means be cautious . But for my money I certainly would consider GEICO as an insurer.If nothing else they deserve a look .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Life insurance goes into effect the minute that you are approved , accept the offer and pay your 1st premium . When you get life insurance quotes , they are just guestimates of what you will be offered . Then you fill out the application . The company reviews your application and verifies your health history and then they make you an actual offer . The offer may be higher , lower or the same as the original quote you were first quoted . Once you recieve the offer , you can accept it in writing or not accept it . If you accept it and make your first payment , you are covered . There are some policies that are sold by mail order companies -LRB- Globe , Mutual of Omaha , Physicians Mutual , AARP , etc. -RRB- which are called `` guaranteed issue life insurance . '' Those policies work differently . With those everyone gets the same rate because they just price them like everyone is in very bad health . You sign up through the mail but you really do n't have any coverage until you have paid them 25 payments over 24-months time . No ONE should buy a policy like this unless you have exhausted all other options . These are last resort policies for people in nursing homes or under hospice care . An agent that specializes with the ytpe of life insurance you want can help you get the most coverage for your premium dollar .
Stillwater Insurance Company has the Best Renters Insurance Rates in most States and most geographic areas . PersonalProperty coverage is available up to $ 300,000 , the minimum available limit of personal property is $ 10,000 for all states , with exception to CA and NM where it is $ 15,000 and FL where the minimum limit is $ 25,000 . Live in partners , such as a boy-friend/girl-friend , areaccepted on the same policy and both partners may be listed as Named or AdditionalNamed Insured . Two immediate family memberts -LRB- adult siblings or parent/adult child -RRB- are accepted on the same policy ; if more than two reside in the household , each would need their own policy . Spouses on one policy are always acceptable , but each adult child would need their own policy . Townhomes/Condos that are located over a store/commercial location/business are allowed . Actual business foot-traffic in the insured property is not allowed . AProperty Management Company of a home or apartment complex may be added as a Certificateholder under the additional interest option on the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
It depends on your needs , budget , and preferences . I would recommend consulting with an independent Medigap broker who can work with you on a personal level and help you evaluate your options . If you want to create a predictable healthcare expense structure where you do n't have to worry about receiving massive medical bills , you may want to consider buying a Medigap plan -LRB- most likely a Medigap Plan F or Plan G -RRB- . The premiums for Medigap plans are typically a little higher than a Medicare Advantage plan , but they feature much broader coverage . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable and are standardized -LRB- meaning a given Medigap plan features the same benefits regardless of the carrier you have it through - a plan F from company ABC is the same plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . They also have no networks , meaning you can go to any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- the vast majority do these days and you can check to see if a doctor in your area does using a physician finder tool on Medicare 's website , Medicare.gov -RRB- . As far as services go , if your doctor accepts Medicare , then they have to accept your Medigap plan as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on your needs , budget , and preferences . I would recommend consulting with an independent Medigap broker who can work with you on a personal level and help you evaluate your options . If you want to create a very well-controlled , predictable healthcare expense structure where you do n't have to worry about receiving massive medical bills , you may want to consider buying a Medigap plan -LRB- most likely a Medigap Plan F or Plan G -RRB- . The premiums for Medigap plans are typically a little higher than a Medicare Advantage plan , but they feature much broader coverage . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable and are standardized -LRB- meaning a given Medigap plan features the same benefits regardless of the carrier you have it through - a plan F from company ABC is the same plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . They also have no networks , meaning you can go to any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- the vast majority do these days and you can check to see if a doctor in your area does using a physician finder tool on Medicare 's website , Medicare.gov -RRB- . As far as services go , if your doctor accepts Medicare , then they have to accept your Medigap plan as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , a private CNA is allowed to accept long term care insurance . I would recommend you contact the insurance companies whose coverage you would like to accept and inquire about becoming a participating provider . They may ask that you accept a discount on your regular fee and agree to accept that charge as payment in full .
Prior to 01/2014 there was a Federal Health Insurance Pool in which people who were denied health insurance would be accepted . This way everyone could purchase health insurance coverage even if they had a preexisting medical condition . Since the ACA now mandates the ALL health insurance carriers must accept everyone there is no longer a need for a health insurance pool and the plans have been dissolved .
end question
start question
life-insurance
If I Die Who Would Get My Life Insurance ?
When you purchase your life insurance policy , you have an opportunity to name a Primary Beneficiary . This is the person who , should you die while th policy is in force , will receive the proceeds of that policy . You also have an opportunity to name a Contingent Beneficiary , to whom the proceeds would be distributed if for some reason , your Primary Beneficiary has also died or can not for some reason receive the money .
If you are the insured person on your life insurance policy , the death benefit will be paid to your beneficiary or beneficiaries that you had designated on your policy . If you are the owner of the life insurance policy , with the insured person being someone else , the policy would go to whoever you had set up as the contingent owner , if you would pass away . If there is no contingent owner , the insured person might become the owner .
The idea is that someone that you love and name in the policy will get the proceeds of your life policy . Life insurance is a legal contract . The company is obliged to pay your beneficiary the proceeds . If your beneficiary is no longer alive , then your contingent beneficiary will receive the proceeds . If there isnt a designated beneficiary that survives you , the probate court will decide .
Your beneficiary gets the death benefit . Make sure you choose a beneficiary who can and will execute any plan you may have for the funds . Maybe if you have children you want some of the money to go to their college cost or maybe payoff your home . I think you should go a step further and do an estate planning plan . Or maybe a trust of some sort to dictate how the money is spent
The person or entity -LRB- charity or business -RRB- that would receive your death benefit if you were to die is called your beneficiary . Your life insurance would go to your primary beneficiary first . If you were to die along with your primary beneficiary , the death benefit would go to your contingent beneficiary . Beneficiary designation is very important . Experienced agents will perform regular beneficiary audits to make sure that in the event a client dies , their death benefit goes where the client whished it to go .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
At LifeQuotes.com we like to have applicants articulate why they want life insurance to make sure that we recommend the right policy from among our 35 life insurers . Important questions to answer are : Why do I think I need life insurance ? Who should get what if I die ? Who are my current dependents ? What is my current and future debt situation ? By when will I have no dependents in my life that I am responsible for ? What would my spouse do or live on if I died ?
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
You should purchase life insurance when you feel it is appropriate . I purchased my first whole life policy when I was 18 years old . I wanted to pay for my final expenses , establish my insurability and I looked to the policy to help me save money in a disciplined manner . When I married , I increased my policy to provide for my brides needs should I die prematurely . I still buy life insurance and am contemplating an additional purchase .
Does your child need life insurance ? Well there will be an answer for everybody and they may not be the same . I purchased life insurance on my children . Here are a few reasons why ... . if one of my children were to die , I do n't think I would be able to go straight back to work on Monday as if nothing happened . I would n't want to have the price of the headstone and service costs get into the pain my wife and I would be experiencing . Imagine telling your wife `` that costs too much '' for the headstone she wants for your child . I also bought for positive reasons too . I purchased whole life so they have permanent insurance working hard at a low cost for them . They have solid cash values and life insurance to take into adulthood .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
Is life insurance a good investment ? Well , it depends on if it fits your risk profile . I consider whole life insurance to be a part of my investment plan as whole life insurance offers a safe rate of return , ca n't go backwards in a down market and protects my family if I die before retirement . My whole life actually protects in retirement as when I die . That said , you will find whole life is absolutely the most boring financial product ever . Simply it does what it says it 's going to do , with no surprises along the way . Other investments shoot up , shoot down , stay flat and even fail . All which makes for great conversations over a beer . Life insurance ? Well , very few people brag about steady .
Do you need life insurance in retirement ? The answer is an individual one . For me personally , I do . Why ? because at some point I am going to die and somebody is going to have to take care of what I leave behind . I personally ca n't leave those people having to figure out how to pay for my service with which thing to liquidate in what ever market at the time . I do n't want them to lose salary in dealing with my death . If they need time to grieve , I do n't want them to do so at a loss . Just a few reasons I choose to carry life insurance till the dayI die .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Does A Retirement Plan Record Keeper Do ?
A Retirement Plan Record Keeper records the monthly allocations made to the individual accounts and enables the current values in the accounts and most importantly the IRS requires specific forms have to filed at the end of the year and the Retirement Plan Record Keeper files thoe required forms to assure that the IRS does not disqualify the Retirement Plan
A Retirement Plan Record Keeper records the monthly allocations made to the individual accounts and enables the current values in the accounts and most importantly the IRS requires specific forms have to filed at the end of the year and the Retirement Plan Record Keeper files thoe required forms to assure that the IRS does not disqualify the Retirement Plan
Vanguard does administer 401k plans . Vanguard can handle everything from helping a small start-up company get a plan up and running to working with a mega plan . For small to mid-size companies , Vanguard uses the record expertise of Ascensus , a leading record keeper and administrator of retirement plans . If you already have a Third Party Administrator , Vanguard can work with them as well .
Medigap and Med Advantage plans are SIGNIFICANTLY different . For a MedAdvantage Plan , they are basically like an HMO . You have a primary physician who is essentially the gate keeper . You do need referrals and you do have co-pays . A Med Advantage plan does also contain a drug plan component , which the supplements do not . If you have significant health issues , than of course the co-pays can add up , however the monthly premium is usually significantly less than the average Medigap plan . Medigap Plans again , are significantly different . The coverage provided by a Medigap Plan is dependent upon what plan you get . The plans are all identified by a corresponding letter . For example , an F Plan tends to offer the most solid coverage , but of course the price is among the highest as you 'd expect . Each lettered plan is written and designed by the government , so no F Plan is different than another , no G is different than another G , etc etc. . What is different is what each individual insurance company charges for the play . So it 's not uncommon for company A to charge 1 price for an F Plan , and companies B , C , D , & E all have significantly different prices for the exact SAME COVERAGE . One thing that I would do is make sure you understand how each lettered plan works , because the difference in coverage can be quite significant . For example , make sure you understand exactly what a `` Part B Excess Charge '' is . In some states , such as PA , they are illegal , but in my state , which is NJ they are perfectly legal . If you purchase a plan that does n't cover the Part B Excess Charge , you could find yourself pleasantly surprised by a significant bill if you ever have a major procedure done . Medigap Plans DO NOT come with a drug plan , or vision plan or dental . A Drug Plan is the only one you are REQUIRED to get , or you could face a penalty by the government . But again , the drug plan must be purchased on the side , as there is no such thing as a Medigap that comes with a drug plan .
Unless you have a magic crystal ball that can tell you when you might have a life threating accident or illness then having a health insurance plan needs to be a part of your financial planning for your future . Notice that I said your future . No one will ever care as much about you as you ! Sure you have those folks in your life who love you but do they have hundreds of thousands of dollars to pay for your medical care if push comes to shove ? Probably not . Since the Affordable Care Act passed the Congress and was signed into law you now have an opportunity to receive guaranteed issue health insurance . So no matter how ill you may be you are guaranteed that you can purchase a health plan . Now the law does have some gate-keeper rules on when you can enroll into a plan . For now the Open Enrollment Period runs from November 15th to February 15th of each year . During that period you can enroll in a health plan , change plans and apply for Federal Assistance , called a subsidy , to help pay for your plan . For the rest of the year you may be eligible for a Special Election Period if you have gotten married , divorced , had a new child or adoption or moved from one geographical area of the country to another . If you have lost your coverage at work due to lay off , loss of job or your employer discontinuing the plan you may be eligible for a Special Election Period . You can check the various Special Election Periods online at : www.healthcare.gov or by calling a local insurance agent who can help you . By the way insurance agents have to go through special training on a government website and pass several tests to be qualified to help you choose a plan on the Federal Marketplace at www.healthcare.gov Insurance agents can help you sort through all of the plans offered on the website and help you enroll in the right plan for you . It 's important that you choose the correct plan as you are locked into that plan for the entire year . So with proper planning you can save yourself a lot of money if you become ill or have an accident and you wo n't have to rely on friends or family to bail you out . A little spent now on a health insurance premium can save you hundreds of thousands of dollars in the future .
The 1st post was made in 2014 ... SO MUCH HAS CHANGED ... in my state I start with 2 questions . # 1 -RRB- What will you make this year - So I can assess if the person is , or is not , eligible for subsidies . If NOT , we do n't mess with Healthcare.gov -LRB- or the state site if there is one -RRB- . Question # 2 -RRB- WHO do you want to see when you need service ? WHO IS MORE important than the rate you pay . In my state we had ALL PPO 's before this year . Now there are also carrier options with an EPO & POS . No HMO 's in my state as of now . Yet the HMO model is prevalent in many states . Who When Pre-authorization Gate Keepers Out of Network Traveling & many other factors make up WHO ... The network type & size IS YOUR HEALTH INSURANCE . Do n't settle for a tiny network that has no out of network coverage . Go PPO if you can ... .
PPO is not a type of health insurance . It is an abbreviation for Preferred Provider Organization -LRB- PPO -RRB- which describes the network provider contracting approach associated with whatever health insurance plan you are purchasing . PPO network based health insurance products have dominated the marketplace for many years so it is not unusual for the consumer to blend the two . After January 1 , 2014 you will want to have your health insurance agent check for you , or if you are a `` do it yourselfer `` do someresearching online to determine the type of provider network associated with health plans you may be interested in . The traditional features of PPO plan designs have been to have office visit & prescription copayments , lower deductibles , higher co-insurance levels and lower out-of-pocket financial exposure for using in-network PPO providers while still having coverage for voluntary usage of non-network providers at reduced benefit levels . PPO plans are the dominant network arrangement in the current health insurance marketplace . However , changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- , are causing insurance carriers to re-design their products and this does extend to the design of their provider networks . This is especially true of the health insurance products sold in the government health insurance marketplaces where the consumer may encounter multiple network or sub-network type provider arrangements in this environment . For instance , here in Tennessee , the BC/BS plan offers essentially the same insurance products with pricing based on your choice of 3 different PPO networks at 3 different price points . The larger the PPO provider network you choose the higher the insurance premium associated with the product . In fact , the smallest of the 3 BC/BS network options is offered only in the government marketplace . So , these are words of caution , there are degrees of difference even within what are technically PPO based products these days . Do n't just assume that a provider is going to be in-network with an insurance carrier based upon your past experience . Verify with both the insurance carrier and the doctor 's office that they are a participating provider . Also , especially in the individual health insurance marketplace starting in 2014 , you will want to be aware of the growing move back to Point-of-Service -LRB- POS -RRB- , Health Maintenance Organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- and Accountable Care Organization -LRB- ACO -RRB- based provider delivery systems associated with a growing number of health insurance products . These other variations on the theme apply more stringent guidelines to provider access in a variety of ways -LRB- reduced network sizes , gate keeper referral arrangements , sharply reduced or no out-of-network coverage -RRB- and introduce entirely new considerations for the consumer .
Symbols are used to designate various types of auto coverage on a business auto policy . They range from 1-9 and 19 for business auto , 21-31 for garage keepers coverage , 41-50 and 59 for truckers , and 61-71 and 79 for motor carriers . For example , symbol 1 refers to `` Any Auto '' and is the broadest designation , allowing the coverage for any automobile an insured my find the need to drive . Symbol 10 is one of the ` custom ' symbols , meaning the use of the vehicle has a meaning that has been modified from one of the standard symbol designations for that class of vehicles . In these cases , the auto in question does not fit 100 % into one of the standard symbol designations , so the insured and the insurer agree to a custom definition of use .
While you can always file a claim , the policy excludes coverage for property damages that come from birds , vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . I think your bees would not be considered an insured cost of loss . In some locations a swarm of bees is something that a bee keeper is looking for .
Yes , if there were a financial hardship if they died . Let 's say the wife has a very demanding and high income career . The husband stays home to raise the kids and take care of the house . The husband suddenly dies . Now the wife has to hire a nanny , a house keeper and possibly a personal assistant to replace the work that was being done .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
what is a SIMPLE retirement plan ? A Simple is an inexpensive opportunity for a small business to have a retirement plan that does n't break the bank in advisor fees . A Simple plan is an IRS approved plan with only a few steps to follow so expensive testing and record keeping are n't necessary . For any small business who are considering a retirement plan to offer , this should be right on top as it does provide a great platform for a business who would rather use it 's money to put towards employees retirements rather than third party administers plans .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
It can take from hours to months to be approved for life insurance . If you are applying for a simplified issue policy that requires no exam or medical records , can be signed digitally and approved on the phone , it may go into effect very quickly . The cons : this type of policy does not dig too deep , and can decline you very easily if you do not fit their exact criteria . They also usually charge higher rates to cover the risk of not knowing everything about you . The pros are that you get by without the hassle of an exam and can get the coverage very quickly . When applying for a larger policy that does require an exam and medical records , the time in underwriting largely depends on when you schedule your exam and how long it takes for your doctor 's office to send your records to the life insurance company . Another thing that can hold up approval is if you saw a doctor that the underwriter wants input from , but records were not ordered from that doctor , or the doctor has left and no one knows where those records are . Finally , an insurance website or agency that is not skilled at working this type of case can slow things down by simply not knowing how to stay on top of cases like this . To speed up approvals for a case involving exam and medical records : 1 -RRB- use an agent who has experience in impaired risk underwriting ; 2 -RRB- list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , and all doctors who made your diagnoses ; 3 -RRB- schedule your exam ASAP ; 4 -RRB- notify your doctors that medical records will be ordered , or obtain the records yourself ; and 5 -RRB- answer all questions from your agent and/or case manager promptly . These tips can cut the time for approval , even in a complicated case , from months to weeks .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance If I Have Ulcerative Colitis ?
Yes , you can get life insurance while having ulcerative colitis . If you want over $ 25,000 of coverage , the insurance company will most likely order medical records . They will check to see if your condition is stable and mild to moderate , which should qualify you for a policy . Recent flare ups , surgeries , certain prescriptions , or complications such as liver disease could cause you to be postponed or declined for a traditional policy . However , there are simplified or guaranteed issue policies that most people with ulcerative colitis can get . Contact an agency that specializes in life insurance for persons with IBD and Crohn 's disease to find the best life insurance options for persons with ulcerative colitis .
Yes , having ulcerative colitis will probably affect your life insurance rates , or possibly even affect the type of life insurance policy that you can get . Mild ulcerative colitis that has been stable without any flare ups for a number of years may not need a table rating , whereas ulcerative colitis that has had exacerbations in recent years would tack on an extra rating . If the condition was not controlled at all , the applicant might need to go with simplified or guaranteed issue life insurance . However , there is life insurance available for the vast majority of ulcerative colitis and Crohn 's Disease sufferers .
Yes , you can get life insurance while having ulcerative colitis . If you want over $ 25,000 of coverage , the insurance company will most likely order medical records . They will check to see if your condition is stable and mild to moderate , which should qualify you for a policy . Recent flare ups , surgeries , certain prescriptions , or complications such as liver disease could cause you to be postponed or declined for a traditional policy . However , there are simplified or guaranteed issue policies that most people with ulcerative colitis can get . Contact an agency that specializes in life insurance for persons with IBD and Crohn 's disease to find the best life insurance options for persons with ulcerative colitis .
Working with an impaired risk agency can help you get a life insurance policy with ulcerative colitis , without having to do any trial and error and being declined . They will know the questions to ask , and in turn , ask underwriters so that you are put with the best life insurance company for your particular situation . If you have uncontrolled ulcerative colitis , there are always simplified issue policies you can get . Again , an impaired risk specialist can help you figure it out very quickly .
Yes , you can get life insurance with ulcerative colitis . Each carrier may respond very differently to this condition - they each have their own underwriting guidelines -LRB- e.g. company A offers a better risk class than company B , therefore lower premiums from company A -RRB- . The risk class a carrier will approve for your program will depend on the details of the medical history including how long you 've had the condition , the severity , ulcer history , and other factors . This type of condition can result in a substandard rate class -LRB- table-rated program -RRB- with many carriers so you will want to work with an independent life insurance broker who can shop the case for you . Keep in mind , applying to multiple carriers at once can be a red flag and work against you . One of the most common parts of the underwriting process is an MIB check -LRB- the Medical Information Bureau -RRB- . For example , if the MIB check shows you 've applied to 10 different companies and you 've gotten declined several times or been rated with a high table-rating , the carriers will obviously express concerns .
Ulcerative colitis can impact the price you pay for a life insurance policy . Like most conditions , it will be considered when your policy is underwritten . A `` preferred '' ratetypicallymeans there were no existing or major conditions present . The premium may be `` rated '' if there are other factors or conditions that increase the risk to the insurer .
Hyoscyamine is a medication used to control symptoms resulting from various GI tract illness and conditions . The drug can be used for for relief of stomach ulcers , IBS -LRB- irritable bowel syndrome -RRB- , colitis and other illnesses . The drug is sold under various brand names including Levsin , Symax , Anaspaz and other names . Check your Part D drug formulary for coverage and benefits .
When applying for life insurance with a history of ulcerative colitis , the underwriting process will look at factors which include ; age when diagnosed , extent of disease , frequency of attacks , date of most recent exacerbation , treatment and period since last treatment . Mild , well controlled cases with some reasonable period of recovery will frequently be assessed at standard rates . Ratings or declination will apply to a more extensive condition with unfavorable factors and frequentattacks . Work with an experienced life insurance professional who can shop to find the best offer for your specific history as outcomes will vary considerably by insurer .
Ulcerative colitis can basically be measured in three stages : mild , moderate and severe . Additional information is necessary such as the date of onset , the last flare up , treatment or surgery and evidence of compliance with doctors orders . If the diagnosis is within the last year , the underwriting offer will more than likely will be postponed . Mild may be table B to standard and moderately severe could generate a table 4-6 . Remission is another factor in the underwriting decision . you may want to apply for an informal with a nationally recognized impaired risk life insurance company to determine what a preliminary offer may generate .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Does AAA Auto Insurance Cover ?
It is the same as every other Auto Insurance company . There is no real advantage one way or the other . You do get the discounts of Auto club membership but I think if you shop around you will find just as good rates or better with any company . But it certainly does n't hurt to check them out to see what the rates are . If they save you money then go for it !
AM Best S&P Moody 's Fitch Comdex 1 Teachers Ins & Ann Assoc A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 2 Northwestern Mutual Life Ins A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 3 Massachusetts Mutual Life Ins A + + AA + Aa2 AA + 98 4 New York Life Ins Co A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 5 New York Life Ins & Ann A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100
You can get renter 's insurance through the AAA insurance agency , but your AAA membership does not automatically include renter 's insurance . You can contact AAA or another independent insurance agent and they can compare quotes among several different carriers . It is often cheaper to purchase both renters and auto insurance through the same company as they will provide discounts for multiple policies .
Yes , AAA does offer term life insurance directly to consumers . They have a rating of A - from A.M.Best , the life insurance rating company . However , unlike homeowners or auto coverage , no carrier can offer a discount for life insurance . You will find many carriers less expensive and with higher financial ratings than AAA . Find a good independent life insurance agent that can help with your coverage .
AAA while being best known for its ' auto towing services and for those of us old enough to remember , their tripticket map service , does indeed sell term insurance . However their are many carriers with higher financial ratings that charge less . In fact , I once had a client who worked for AAA but decided on a less expensive policy with better ratings and a lower cost .
AAA Term life insurance has the same guarantees of most Term life insurance . As of June , 2012 , their company 's AM Best rating is A - . To compare rates with AAA Term life insurance , go to a website offering instant life insurance quotes . Also , be sure to review the health requirements needed for AAA life insurance before applying . If you apply and are declined , it will go on your MIB and could make it more difficult to purchase some other life insurance policies .
AAA has auto insurance in many states and their rates are typically very competitive . Although they are mostly known for towing and labor benefits along with travel guides , they do have an insurance wing that is very reputable . A licensed broker can provide quotes from AAA and many other highly-rated carriers .
Every rating agency has their own ratings . With AM Best , A + + is their best rating . With Fitch , their highest rating is AAA . Moody 's highest rating is Aaa . S&P 's best life insurance company rating is AAA . Weiss 's highest rating is A + . The companies with the best ratings will have high ratings from all these agencies .
There is no one top rated life insurance company , but every life insurance company has the chance to earn the top ratings from several different rating companies . That being said , only a small % of companies get the top rating . To find a company 's rating , you can go to their website and hit the `` About Us '' tab . The main rating companies are AM Best -LRB- for which A + + is their top rating -RRB- , S&P -LRB- for which AAA is highest -RRB- , Fitch -LRB- also uses AAA for best rating -RRB- and Moody 's -LRB- Aaa is their top rating -RRB- .
As of June , 2012 , the AM Best rating for AAA life insurance was A - . It 's Term insurance is competitive and has the same guarantees as most life insurance companies . It does require fairly good health to get the Term insurance , although they offer Whole Life that covers more health conditions . Rather than rely on the quotes of one carrier , you might find a better price shopping multiple carriers , as you can get via one agency or online website . That way , you will have someone that can guide you to another product if you do not qualify or do n't care for AAA has to offer .
Yes , AAA -LRB- American Automobile Association -RRB- does offer life insurance . In order to compare AAA 's life insurance prices to the quotes from other companies , visit a website that offers instant life insurance quotes . Be sure to compare `` apples to apples '' , such as guarantees and prices at the actual health rating that you will be rated with each company .
Independent insurance agencies in your area will get you comparison quotes , usually from some of the strongest carriers doing business locally . If you are an AAA Auto Club member , they would like to talk to you about your auto insurance needs . For those with military backgrounds and direct connections , USAA is viable along with several other Armed Forces sources for insurance . A simple search will provide contacts for these and many other options for auto insurance to fit your specific financial and coverage needs .
Home insurance can be obtained numerous property and casualty insurance companies . If you currently have auto insurance , you may start with that company as having both auto and homeowners policies with the same company can provide discounts that reduce your overall cost . You can also get quotes online from companies such as State Farm , Farmer 's , Liberty Mutual , and Allstate . While these companies will provide quotes for their own companies , getting a quote from an insurance broker or AAA insurance can provide quotes from several different companies and may provide your best opportunity to find the lowest cost . Be sure to speak to an experienced insurance agent to ensure you have proper coverage . Just because once company has the lowest price does n't make it your best option . Be sure understand deductibles and riders such as earthquake insurance .
AAA does not offer Disability Insurance . They do offer Life Insurance and Annuities along with Auto and RV insurance . To get a Disability Insurance quote , contact a website or agency that looks trustworthy and visit with an agent to see whether they can shop several Disability Insurance policies to find your best rate .
Life insurance by AAA , also called the `` auto club '' by many , is primarily in the auto business and known for its ' roadside assistance . However , the also sell life insurance . Financially they are rated an A - by AM Best , the fourth highest rating . My experience with them is limited by the fact they use in-house agents to sell their product .
Great question ! Here in Texas the American Automobile Association -LRB- AAA -RRB- does offer renters , home owners and even watercraft insurance in addition to their Auto insurance policies . They also have life insurance and financial services . I 'm fairly certain that your local office will also . Drop them a line and ask them to be sure . Thanks for asking !
AAA Life Insurance Company has a rating of A - by AM Best as of May 31 , 2013 . They offer several types of life insurance products and premiums are guaranteed level , which is a good feature to have . It can be difficult to get AAA life insurance with some health conditions .
Jim has pointed out some excellent features of AAA life insurance that you should know before buying AAA 's coverage . I would like to add that it is also easy to be declined for their life insurance , and that being declined by them can keep you from getting other coverage for which you would otherwise qualify . I reiterate that it is up to you to read the fine print before mailing in your application . If you are unsure whether you qualify , or do not understand the conditions of this type of coverage , call one of us on this website and we will be happy to explain it to you . Thanks for asking .
I do n't know about homeowner policy availability through AAA in every State but I can speak personally for Florida . They are my homeowner carrier in Florida . Their rate was reasonably competitive and the coverages are good . The customer service was great . Therefore , since Florida is one of the least favorite States for top insurers to do business in , I would think that the chances are good they are available in most States . If you are an AAA Member , you have a chance to get a good carrier .
There are six rating services that monitor and assign financial strength or claims paying ability rankings : A.M Best , S&P , Moodys Fitch , Comdex and Weiss . A.M. Best measures claims paying ability , the rest financial stability or strength . The highest A.M. Best rating is AA + . The highest S&P rating is AAA , but when the U.S. government was downgraded by S&P , so were the AAA rated life insurance companies . There are public forums online on the web where you can obtain the ratings of most life insurance companies that manufacture annuities .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Someone With High Blood Pressure Get Life Insurance ?
Insurance companies look at hypertension in several ways . Some will ask if blood pressure readings have been above a certain number for the last few years or more . Some will ask the average of readings for the past one or more years . The number and type of medications is considered , and of course , the cause for the hypertension . Secondary hypertension caused by disease elsewhere in the body , CHF , etc are underwritten as a higher risk . To get the lowest priced life insurance policy with high blood pressure , contact a good impaired risk agency that knows how to shop multiple carriers to get your best rate .
As long as the hypertension is controlled and not excessively high or complicated by other factors which on their own could be reasons to make the proposed insured a substandard risk , high blood pressure should not prevent one from obtaining life insurance . If however the condition is not under control , it might not be possible to obtain an underwritten life insurance policy . Consult with an experienced life insurance professional who will be able to shop the market for the best fit .
Generally speaking managed high blood pressure with no other outstanding impairments should be an obstacle to securing life insurance coverage . Prescription dosage , weight and other contributing factor my play a role in the final offer . Keep in mind that certain life insurance companies appear more benevolent to high blood pressure , hypertension , heart murmurs and other cardiac issues . So it pays to shop around .
Life insurance companies have taken the stance that if you can control your blood pressure using reasonable methods of medication or diet or otherwise , you can probably buy life insurance . It is more complicated than that but controlling your blood pressure is the starting point . You wo n't likely buy life insurance without an increased premium when you suffer from blood pressure control issues . If you can demonstrate a history of making and taking the steps necessary to return to a more normal state , underwriters will tend to issue coverage when you show a history of blood pressure maintenance in a normal range . The totality of your health picture is important . If you are overweight with blood pressure issues , or smoking and have high blood pressure , have other medical conditions along with high blood pressure , for example , these other complications lowers the chance you 'll get coverage or a rate you find attractive . WIth more and more underwriting looking at family history and genetics , and with solid medical success treating blood pressure , underwriters and carriers are more willing to write life insurance for clients with high blood pressure controlled to within striking distance of normal pressure levels .
You can get life insurance if you have high blood pressure . The factor that insurance companies look for when it comes to high blood pressure is how many medications that you take to keep it under control . If your doctor has you on more than one prescription for high blood pressure , it means that it is not under control . When your blood pressure is not under control , it can lead to a stroke . Most of the time , there are limited opportunities for insurance if you have had a stroke recently . However , there are easy issue policies that dont ask about how many medications you are taking . These policies usually have a higher premium because they ask less health questions . Most insurance companies will also put a cap on the benefit for these policies . Make sure that your agent knows your complete health situation so that she can find you a policy that you will be able to qualify for . There are definitely a lot of options for you when you have high blood pressure . If you are on several medications for blood pressure , talk to your doctor and see how you would be able to get down to one . Most of the time he will suggest that you diet and exercise . It is a serious matter so listen to what your doctor is telling you .
How does high blood pressure effect life insurance ? HBP effects the rate class you are given by underwriting . You could possibly be a decline if your blood pressure is too high and untreated . High Blood Pressure is linked to heart conditions and underwriters are concerned about untreated high blood pressure . On the other hand , a person with high blood pressure who has had treatment -LRB- medications -RRB- and shows good control of the problem , can even secure a preferred rating with some companies .
High blood pressure -LRB- hypertension -RRB- will not increase life insurance rates with some companies , as long as it is controlled . Most companies charge a little more if blood pressure medication is used , but some will give their best rating even with the use of one antihypertensive drug . If it takes two or more medications to control blood pressure , the rate will usually increase more . Some companies look at the average blood pressure reading over the past couple of years , some look at the highest blood pressure reading in the past year , and some use a combination of guidelines . Having stable and controlled blood pressure for over 6 months is the best way to get your best rate . However , there are simplified and guaranteed issue policies even for those with uncontrolled blood pressure .
Does high blood pressure increase life insurance ? If you mean increase the price , the answer would be yes . Uncontrolled high blood pressure is often a decline . For some people the life insurance medical exam is the first physical they 've had since high school . Often a eye opening experience can occur . That said , insurance companies do n't usually punish by cost people who have controlled blood pressure via medications . Once controlled , high blood pressure for the most part becomes a non factor .
High blood pressure is a common affliction , so common in fact that it affects tens of millions of people . Life insurance companies however consider it to be an additional risk factor when providing policies . In most cases , even if you have high blood pressure , you will be able to get life insurance , but the premiums might be higher than they would be for a person who does not have it . In some extreme instances , an insurance company might even decline your life insurance application as a result of your blood pressure . Much depends upon the company that you apply to for insurance . There are many different companies , and each tends to have a somewhat different view of the significance of high blood pressure .
In a word , yes . High blood pressure is one of many health conditions that have a bearing on the rate an insurance company will charge . Companies are usually pretty understanding of high blood pressure assuming the applicant is maintaining somewhat normal readings with medication . If you have high blood pressure , the insurance company will want to see a year of controlled readings in order to get the best rates .
Yes , having uncontrolled high blood pressure can affect life insurance . It can cause the premiums to go very high or even cause the policy to be declined . This is especially true if the hypertension is in tandem with other health conditions such as diabetes , sleep apnea , or renal disease . On the other hand , blood pressure that is well controlled with medication may only affect your rates slightly , or not at all . Using a broker with many options will help you get your best rate while having high blood pressure .
You can secure life insurance coverage even with high blood pressure . Assuming there are no other medical items , managed high blood pressure under the care of a doctor can be underwritten quite favorably . And keep in mind that some carriers draw a distinction between hyper tension and high blood pressure , i.e do n't define yourself ... your doctor will do that for you .
Life insurance is a policy that your money pays for but your health is what buys it . The healthier you are the better the rate . As health issues surface we go down the line of insurability until we finally can not be approved for anything but a guaranteed issue plan . Companies will look at the whole picture . For example , a person with controlled high blood pressure and no health issues may get standard rates . A person who is overweight and has high blood pressure may receive a higher rate than standard and a person who has high blood pressure , is overweight , smokes , and is on heart medication may be declined . A good life insurance agent can help you find an affordable plan and help guide you .
High blood pressure can increase life insurance premiums . But managed high blood pressure through medication with diet and exercise may mitigate your underwriting offer . Some lower end high blood pressure diagnosis may also be classified also as hypertension . If all other health conditions are within normal parameters managed high blood pressure does n't automatically mean higher premiums .
High blood pressure -LRB- hypertension -RRB- that is uncontrolled can cause a policy to be rated up or even declined , especially if it is in conjunction with another health condition such as diabetes or kidney disease . Some insurance companies look at your average blood pressure reading over a couple of years , while others will ask if you had any readings over a certain number in the past year or so . Some insurance companies will rate Preferred Plus just as long as all other health is in that range and blood pressure is well controlled . Some will only rate as good as Preferred or lower with use of blood pressure medication . The type and number of meds taken can also make a difference . By using an agency that carries a number of companies , you can find the one that rates you best based on your particular hypertension details .
Medicare does not normally pay for a blood pressure machine . Two exceptions are if you are suspected to have `` white coat syndrome '' where your blood pressure goes up when taken by a health care professional . Then Medicare may pay for an ambulatory blood pressure monitoring device that takes your blood pressure periodically over a 24 hour period . Or if you are on dialysis in your home , Medicare will pay for your blood pressure monitor and stethoscope .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . The company will look at your personal medical history , smoker status , height/weight profile , results of the medical exam -LRB- if applying for a policy requiring it - no exam policies typically cost more -RRB- , your family medical history -LRB- e.g. cancer or heart disease before age 60 in the immediate family -RRB- , motor vehicle record , and any hazardous activities you may participate in -LRB- such as aviation , scuba diving , drag racing , etc -RRB- . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Having high blood pressure in and of itself , will probably not keep you from obtaining Life Insurance especially if you are under medical care and it is controlled . Depending upon the company 's underwriting guidelines , it may be that coverage would be offerd to you at a higher rate than say someone else your age who has `` normal '' bloodpressure . HIgh blood pressure in combination with other factors such as age , health issues or history may affect a company 's ability to offer coverage , but as always , talk to your Insurance Professional .
If you are talking about a denial to an application for long term care insurance , there are several steps you can take : 1 -RRB- Find out the reason for the denial . 2 -RRB- If the reason is a mistake -LRB- e.g. your medical records say you were diagnosed with CHF but they later found out you did not have CHF -RRB- , get a letter from your doctor succinctly explaining that , along with correct medical records , if possible . 3 -RRB- If the reason was high blood pressure at the insurance exam , high cholesterol on their labs , etc , offer to pay for a blood pressure reading at your doctor 's office , or a new blood test . Declines for any type of insurance are usually final , but sometimes you can reverse them . Using an agency that has lots of experience with impaired risk cases helps .
end question
start question
annuities
What Are Deferred Annuities Best Suited For ?
What are deferred annuities best suited for ? The challenge with this question is that the term deferred annuity has at least two `` definitions '' . I will describe two scenarios and if your question is not answered , please do not hesitate to contact me . A deferred annuity can refer to exchanging a lump sum for a guaranteed income at a point in the future . In this situation , a deferred annuity would be suited for someone who wanted a guaranteed flow of income with no management responsibilities . A life annuity may or may not include a guaranteed payout . There are different options , so ask your insurance agent for details . In addition to the income amount , taxation during the the deferral period and of the income flow should be considered . In Canada , a deferred annuity can also refer to Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- and Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- . Both of these are issued by insurance companies and offer the option of an annuity in the future . Since they are issued by insurance companies , they also offer guarantees not offered by other institutions for non-registered investments . These include potential creditor protection and estate planning opportunities , such as bypassing probate . Segregated funds are similar to mutual funds , but they offer maturity and death guarantees . In addition , some segregated funds include the `` locking in '' of gains . Depending on your individual situation , there could also be some tax advantages to these plans . These type of deferred annuities are best suited for individuals who are looking for , and would benefit from , the additional features and guarantees . This is an overview of a potentially complex subject . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me .
What are deferred annuities best suited for ? The challenge with this question is that the term deferred annuity has at least two `` definitions '' . I will describe two scenarios and if your question is not answered , please do not hesitate to contact me . A deferred annuity can refer to exchanging a lump sum for a guaranteed income at a point in the future . In this situation , a deferred annuity would be suited for someone who wanted a guaranteed flow of income with no management responsibilities . A life annuity may or may not include a guaranteed payout . There are different options , so ask your insurance agent for details . In addition to the income amount , taxation during the the deferral period and of the income flow should be considered . In Canada , a deferred annuity can also refer to Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- and Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- . Both of these are issued by insurance companies and offer the option of an annuity in the future . Since they are issued by insurance companies , they also offer guarantees not offered by other institutions for non-registered investments . These include potential creditor protection and estate planning opportunities , such as bypassing probate . Segregated funds are similar to mutual funds , but they offer maturity and death guarantees . In addition , some segregated funds include the `` locking in '' of gains . Depending on your individual situation , there could also be some tax advantages to these plans . These type of deferred annuities are best suited for individuals who are looking for , and would benefit from , the additional features and guarantees . This is an overview of a potentially complex subject . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is a great question ! There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . An immediate annuity is one that is made with a single lump sum deposit , and the annuity begins paying out no later than a year from the contract date . A deferred annuity is a contract that may allow periodic payments , or a single payment to fund it ; and the payments do not start for a specified number of years later . It will have a number of fees and penalties attached to the early withdrawal of the funds . A deferred annuity will generally provide a much larger return on your investment because of the time between funding and annuitization , something not provided in the immediate annuity . An immediate annuity would be something to consider if you received a settlement , or large inheritance , and needed to supplement your income , and lower your tax liability . A deferred annuity would be suited for creating an income stream for later in life , understanding that once it was funded , the money would become relatively unavailable to you until then . Please be sure to have your agent walk through a good suitability study with you to ensure you get the annuity that best suits your need . Feel free to inbox me , if you have further questions . Thank you for asking !
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Since there isnt a medical requirement , annuities can be purchased by anyone who has the money and the need . People buy annuities as a part of a retirement plan in which case the entire cost may be tax deferred . Others buy non-tax-qualified annuities because they want to accumulate money and defer taxes on the interest . Annuities are even purchased to provide income to settle a law suit .
It all depends on your risk tolerance and financial needs . Fixed annuities are well suited for a conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns . Indexed Annuities are well suited for a conservative to semi-conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns with the opportunity for a higher return than a fixed annuity . Variable Annuities are well suited for an investor who does not mind taking on the risk of loss . A person should carefully asses their risk tolerance and realistically how much loss they are willing to withstand before investing in a Variable Annuity . Annuities can be a great idea depending on your retirement savings needs .
That is a great question ! The question is really not accurate though , it 's like asking why all dogs bite people . Not all dogs do , but the ones that do give them all a bad name . Are variable annuities bad ? They most certainly can be , if your risk tolerance is low , or your allocations made unwisely . Just like you would pick a dog that suits your needs and temperament , you should choose an annuity to suit you also . The risk in a variable annuity may not be right for you , but may suit someone else quite well . Please take the time to discuss what you are looking for with an agent that will listen , and take your concerns to heart . If they pressure you , or appear to be more interested in the sale than what you say , do n't buy , and send them packing . Annuities are not something that you can afford to buy without completely understanding what you 're buying . I hope that helps , please contact me if you need more information , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
That is a great question ! Annuities can be a great part of a retirement plan , but they are n't suited for everyone , because of the type of investment that they are . Before an agent can legally sell you an annuity , they have to do a `` suitability analysis '' . In this analysis , we sit down and discuss your current financial status , your cash flow issues , and your tolerance for risk , among other things . If you are financially suited for the purchase of an annuity , it is often the risk tolerance that determines which type of annuity is best for you . If you have a very low tolerance , then a variable annuity would not be a suitable annuity for you , while a fixed annuity probably would be . If you had a moderate risk tolerance , but an aversion to losing money , the variable annuity again might not be suitable for you , but an indexed one might be . If you have a high risk tolerance , and like to play the market , and keep involved in the transactions , then this may be the annuity for you . I hope that answers your question , please feel free to drop me a line if you 'd like more details , ok ? Thanks for asking !
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
They arent . A fixed annuity is merely a plan that has been developed . It might be perfect for your situation or might not fit at all . There isnt any investment risk in a fixed annuity . That suits many . There is an inflation risk which could concern some ; however , that hasnt been a big issue recently . The benefit is that the earnings of the annuity are tax deferred which allows them to grow faster than if you were paying taxes on the earnings . Ultimately , they can provide you with a guaranteed income that you can not outlive .
Non-qualified tax deferred annuities are personal property and an economic asset . It is feasible to think that the IRS could collect liquid assets to satisfy taxes due after attempts to secure payment had been made . A tax attorney in familiar with the IRS is best suited and should be consulted in payment resolution disputes with the IRS .
Product suitability should be a required process of prudence for all potential financial product purchases , including tax deferred and immediate annuities . If your effective tax bracket is high , tax deferred annuities over time can have accumulating advantages , i.e. mid to long term , high tax bracket savers and investors should consider tax deferred annuities . Tax deferred annuities have three basic crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . A risk tolerance assessment needs to be performed to determine your financial profile and product suitability . Keep in mind that tax deferred variable annuities can lose money .
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Obamacare Offer Medigap Insurance ?
No and luckily it is not needed . Medicare along with Medigap Insurance works great . Obamacare or the Affordable Care Act impacts folks under age 65 and not on Medicare . However , in the Affordable Care Act they did have cuts to Medicare but other than that it is not related . The cuts to Medicare are estimated to be $ 700 billion . Getting a Medigap Plan is fairly easy if you work with an independent agent that specializes in it . You pay a monthly premium and then you have little to no out of pocket costs for medical expenses . There is also no network with Medigap Plans which means you can go to any doctor or hospital you want . No need for a referral to see a specialist either . The biggest thing about Medigap Plans is the benefits are not allowed to change from year to year . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- plans are constantly changing .
No . You are making the mistake that many people are making in thinking that ObamaCare is an insurance plan , it is not . ObamaCare or the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- as that is its true title -RRB- is a massive law accompanied by an even more massive set of administrative guidelines that set new rules for how health insurance plans are offered , priced , structured . Plus it did create the online government health insurance marketplaces -LRB- e.g. - HealthCare.gov -RRB- as a supposedly simpler way for people to purchase individual health insurance and possibly receive subsidies for the cost of their health insurance . ObamaCare is in no way a government health insurance program such as Medicaid or Medicare .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
Does Obamacare cover Medigap ? At this time , no Obamacare does n't intermix with Medigap plans . Down the road over time , no one knows for sure if there will be legislation to bring all healthcare together in either a national plan or a base plan all must have with supplements people can choose to add onto their base coverage .
No and luckily it is not needed . Medicare along with Medigap Insurance works great . Obamacare or the Affordable Care Act impacts folks under age 65 and not on Medicare . However , in the Affordable Care Act they did have cuts to Medicare but other than that it is not related . The cuts to Medicare are estimated to be $ 700 billion . Getting a Medigap Plan is fairly easy if you work with an independent agent that specializes in it . You pay a monthly premium and then you have little to no out of pocket costs for medical expenses . There is also no network with Medigap Plans which means you can go to any doctor or hospital you want . No need for a referral to see a specialist either . The biggest thing about Medigap Plans is the benefits are not allowed to change from year to year . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- plans are constantly changing .
If it has not already , it eventually will unless there are further delays or changes to the Affordable Care Act . Granted , those who have plans that were in place before the passage of the law on March 23 , 2010 can technically keep these policies in effect . That assumes your insurance carrier does n't phase out such policies and that you make essentially no changes to the policy . You may recall there was quite a national uproar over this issue late in 2013 that prompted President Obama to kind of have to live up to his `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' promise so we have seen more renewal offers of existing pre-Obamacare policies since then in the individual and small group marketplaces . And this does kind of trap these policyholders . ObanaCare compliant policies are generally significantly more expensive than their pre-Obamacare counterparts . So , you can experience some pretty significant rate increases on your old policy in some cases and still be marginally better off financially than moving to an ObamaCare compliant policy . I am certainly seeing this scenario play out in some cases . For ObamaCare to have any vague chance of working financially they really need to pull as many people as possible into their pool . Continuing to allow the existence of non-compliant policies denies them this revenue stream and probably a healthier population that chooses to maintain such policies . So , regardless of the promises of politicians , consumers need to be vigilant if they have an old style policy that they want to keep . The pressure will continue to build to save you people who do n't know better from your `` trash '' policies as the administration referred to them and to move you into the glorious world of ObamaCare .
No , Obamacare does not cover Medigap , or any other Medicare related expenses . In fact , Obamacare actually calls for over $ 700 BILLION in cuts to the Medicare system over its first ten years , a budgetary item that places the benefits available to our country 's senior citizens at tremendous risk . The benefits of Obamacare are only available to those under the age of 65 , which basically equates to this law taking money away from caring for our nation 's seniors to secure coverage for younger individuals , at least those younger Americans that do not make enough income to cover the cost of coverage themselves .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
In addition to what Jason stated , I 'd also like to point out that not all insurance companies offer Medigap Select plans . In fact , the insurance companies that offer Medigap Select Plans often are the major companies advertising online . Their premiums are usually high and to make the Medigap Plan more ` affordable ' , they offer the Medigap Select . One of the great benefits of having a Medigap Plan is your freedom to choose any Medicare provider without the boundaries of a network . Getting a Medigap Select Plan will limit your freedom . While you may be happy with your local in-network hospital , if you want to see a cardiologist in a neighboring state , you 'll be out of luck on a Select Plan . There are dozens of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans at affordable prices . I 've never had to offer my clients a Medigap Select Plan F , G or N because I 've always found them an affordable Medigap Policy by taking the time to shop the Medicare Supplement market .
Unfortunately , the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may be denied coverage . If you are not in your initial Open Enrollment period or another Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Policy . Therefore , it 's best to get a Medigap Policy when you think you do n't need one . Often times people wait until a health condition arises because they think the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- will apply . With that said , each insurance company has unique health questions . One insurance company may deny rheumatoid arthritis while another is okay with it . In other words , do n't assume you will be denied . An independent agent can review your health history and let you know if you can apply for a Medigap policy .
Obamacare is national mandatory health insurance for all Americans . Presently the health care law does n't address long term care as does Medicaid . Individual long term care insurance is private insurance and at present is not directly effected by Obamacare . It is conceivable that Medicaid could be effected by Obamacare and may have future ramifications for long term care . It 's simply too early to assess the impact .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
Yes ! Humana does offer Medigap plans . Of the 11 different plans in the marketplace , Humana offers Medigap plans A , B , C , F , G , K , L , N , and High-deductible F - please note , not every medigap plan may be available and may not be sold in every area . Medigap plans are the same from every company because they 're standardized by the government . The only difference between the coverage from each carrier is the price they charge for it . Price quotes are determined by the quoted plan -LRB- s -RRB- , your age , zip code , any tobacco usage , and marital status -LRB- some carriers offer rate discounts if married and if spouses applying together -RRB- . It 's important to compare the rates from every available option in your area -LRB- including Humana and every other insurer offering Medigap plans in your zip code -RRB- so you can secure your desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . If you need quotes for Humana 's Medigap plans -LRB- as well as those from other carriers to compare to as well -RRB- , please give me a call at 888-972-0024 - that connects to my office directly -LRB- not an automated system -RRB- . You can also send me an e-mail by clicking on the `` contact me '' button next to my name . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
Asking this question tells me that you need the help of a health insurance broker familiar with your marketplace . Do a Google search , call the Better Business Bureau , look in the Yellow Pages -LRB- if any one does that anymore -RRB- , ask a friend , but get somebody to do the leg work for you . Or , of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov and look up coverage there . When using HealthCare.Gov the consumer should understand that not all health insurance carriers are available through the government marketplaces and that provider networks and approved prescription lists may be different with the same carrier depending upon whether you are dealing with their products outside or inside of the government marketplaces . One good thing about ObamaCare is that the simple answer to your question is just `` apply with an insurance carrier . '' The bad news about ObamaCare is that they now give you a specific time of year -LRB- the open enrollment -RRB- for you to enroll in coverage and after that time only persons experiencing certain change of life status events can enroll for individual coverage outside the open enrollment period each year . You are asking this question nearly 2 months after the close of the first open enrollment period on March 31st , 2014 . If you could have enrolled during that open enrollment period but for some reason did n't and have n't experienced a change of life status event -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , having a baby , losing employer based coverage -RRB- recently then you technically ca n't enroll in major medical insurance again until January 1 , 2015 . Being uninsured will also technically make you subject to the individual mandate tax penalty when you do your individual income taxes next year . Do n't feel all alone , millions of people went through the first ObamaCare enrollment and still managed to stay uninsured . Some by intention other by inattention . If you can pass a few simple medical questions and coverage for pre-existing conditions is n't a must then I would suggest you look into getting a Short Term Medical policy to tide you over for the rest of the year . Be advised that Short Term Medical insurance is not viewedas meeting the requirements under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual mandate penalty . But , many people are finding that the cost of short term medical insurance is low enough against the prices of the new ObamaCare compliant plans that even taking the tax penalty into account they are dollars ahead with the short term policy . For advise please feel free to contact me .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- individual and group major medical policies that are ObamaCare compliant can not have pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations on benefits , or waiting periods for the pre-existing condition to be covered . If someone is offering you a policy that does not comply with these requirements it may be a Short Term Medical policy or an indemnity/discount type plan . While these are legitimate insurance policies -LRB- as long as you are informed in advance of what they do and do not do -RRB- , as a rule they exclude pre-existing conditions and they do not meet the legal requirements under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty .
Since all Medigap plans are standardized , the benefits are exactly the same with every insurance company . This means that Medigap Plan F with ABC insurance company is the exact same Medigap Plan F with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is price . Medicare does not regulate the price of Medigap Plans ... just the benefits . That 's why there is such a competitive market . Many Medicare Beneficiaries like the idea of purchasing Medigap through a well known insurance company , but that does n't mean you are going to get the best price . Medigap is not like health insurance for under age 65 where a Medical director approves or denies your bills . Medigap payments are made by the insurance carrier if it 's a Medicare approved item because they have to -- it 's the law . I suppose that was the long way of saying there is n't one insurance company that has the best Medigap coverage . They all offer the same standardized plans and pay the bills based upon CMS regulations .
Let us begin by being clear on what ObamaCare is not . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- a.k.a. - ObamaCare -RRB- does not in itself provide insurance to anyone . ObamaCare is a bureaucratic & administrative structure that imposes requirements on the private health insurance system and , where accepted by state governments , expands the eligibility range for qualifying for Medicaid . It is funded through government appropriations channeled through several departments of the government -LRB- Health & Human Services , IRS , DOL , etc. -RRB- , a wide range of new taxes -LRB- tanning salons , medical devices , taxes on Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans , taxes on health insurance companies , increased Medicare Part A tax on high income wage earners are few examples -RRB- , changes to existing tax breaks -LRB- reducing the FSA deduction from $ 3500/yr to $ 2500/yr and eliminating the eligibility of over the counter drugs from coverage under FSA plans -RRB- , a $ 63 per employee per year fee assessed on group health insurance plans , the eventual employer mandate and individual mandate tax penalties for non-compliance , reductions in the amount of out of pocket medical expenses you can deduct from your personal income taxes -LRB- threshold increased from 7.5 % to 10 % of income to qualify for a deduction -RRB- , fees -LRB- insurance companies have to pay for the privilege of selling their products in the government marketplaces -RRB- , and $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over the next decade was shifted over to help fund Obamacare . This is not a total listing but hits many of the essential high points of where the money is supposed to be coming from .
The best way to compare prices on Medigap policies is to speak with an independent Medigap insurance broker . Independent brokers can sell Medigap policies from just about every company that offers Medigap plans . Since all Medigap plans are standardized and the only difference is price , you can compare plan F 's from every company that offers it in your zip code to see which carrier will offer you the coverage at the lowest possible cost -LRB- same goes for comparing plan G 's , N 's , etc. -RRB- . I would also compare the prices of plan Fs and plan Gs because the benefits are identical except plan G has a deductible of $ 147 -LRB- the Medicare Part B deductible in 2014 and 2015 -RRB- . If the difference in price is more than $ 12.25 per month , plan G would be a better deal for you . If the difference in price is less than $ 12.25 per month , then plan F would be a better deal for you . I would be happy to help you with your Medigap coverage and compare Medigap plans and quotes from every company offering them to you in your area - our agency is licensed in over 35 states and over 50 insurance companies . Please feel free to contact me for assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Part D Cover Diabetic Supplies ?
Medicare Part D does cover some diabetic supplies . Part D will cover supplies that are used for administration of insulin -LRB- syringes , needles , alcohol swabs , gauze and inhaled insulin devices -RRB- . Medicare Part B covers diabetic supplies such as blood glucose monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets .
Medicare Part D does cover some diabetic supplies . Part D will cover supplies that are used for administration of insulin -LRB- syringes , needles , alcohol swabs , gauze and inhaled insulin devices -RRB- . Medicare Part B covers diabetic supplies such as blood glucose monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets .
Yes , Medicare does cover insulin pump supplies under Medicare Part B . If the Medicare patient uses syringes or pen for diabetes , rather than a pump , those supplies are not covered by Part B but are covered by Part D . The diabetic person using the insulin pump must have type 1 diabetes , or hard to control type 2 or gestational diabetes .
Medicare Part B-covered Diabetes Supplies : Blood sugar -LRB- also called blood glucose -RRB- self-testing equipment and supplies are covered as durable medical equipment for all people with Medicare Part B who have diabetes , even if you dont use insulin . Self-testing supplies include : Blood sugar monitors Blood sugar test strips Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions for checking the accuracy of testing equipment and test strips . Medicare Part B covers the same type of blood sugar testing supplies for people with diabetes whether or not they use insulin . However , the amount of supplies that are covered varies . If you use insulin , you may be able to get up to 300 test strips and 300 lancets every 3 months . If you dont use insulin , you may be able to get 100 test strips and 100 lancets every 3 months . If your doctor says its medically necessary , Medicare will allow you to get additional test strips and lancets . Medically necessary means that services or supplies are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your medical condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice . You may need to keep a record that shows how often youre actually testing yourself .
Medicare is concerned about diabetes type II and includes coverage for many diabetes testing equipment and supplies . Your doctor must prescribe your diabetic supplies . Some of the Medicare Part B covered items include testing strips , glucose meters , lancets and insulin but ONLY IF it is used in a pump . Levemir flexpen 's are part of Medicare Part D . If your drug plan includes the flexpen under the formulary some of the cost may be reimbursed .
Yes and no . Medicare covers a lot of parts to diabetic care , but some of it will have to be covered by other means . For specific diabetic benefits , your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- will cover certain testing supplies and services including blood sugar testing monitors and testing strips , lancet devices and lancets , and glucose control solutions . These items are considered durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- and would be covered under Part B. Prescriptions such as insulin and metformin -LRB- common treatment medicines for diabetes -RRB- would be covered under a Part D prescription drug plan - Part B would not provide coverage for these types of diabetic care items . Original Medicare only covers 80 % of the expenses so you may want to consider adding a Medigap plan to cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . Consult with an experienced broker who can review your specific medical history and help you determine the best course of action for your needs . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Diabetes Supplies & Services Supplies : Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- covers some diabetes supplies , including : Blood sugar -LRB- glucose -RRB- test strips Blood sugar testing monitors Insulin Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions Therapeutic shoes or inserts Part B covers some diabetes services , including : Diabetes self-management training Yearly eye exam Foot exam Glaucoma tests Nutrition therapy services -LRB- medical -RRB-
`` Original '' Medicare will cover SOME medications under Part B . As a general rule , infusion therapy , immunizations administered in your doctor 's office and most diabetic supplies -LRB- including insulin -RRB- may be covered under Part B. Most prescriptions filled on an outpatient basis by mail order or at a retail pharmacy are covered under Medicare Part D. Your Part D prescription drug plan is a separate benefit offered by private insurance carriers . The premium you pay will vary by zip code and the covered medications . Many Part D plans have an annual deductible that must be satisfied before brand name prescriptions are included with copay 's . Be sure to verify that the medications you take are included in your Part D drug formulary You can compare drug formulary 's at Medicare.gov by using the drug formulary prescription plan finder .
Medicare Part B covers some diabetic supplies , including blood glucose testing monitors , blood glucose test strips , lancets , lancet devices , and glucose control solutions . People with diabetes may receive shoe inserts to prevent foot sores , and some may even receive therapeutic shoes . Medicare Part D covers syringes and other supplies associated with the administration of insulin .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . An exception to this to have insulin covered under Part B is when insulin is administered via a medically necessary insulin pump - under this scenario , an external insulin pump and the insulin may be covered as durable medical equipment . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . If you 're looking for a Medigap plan or are interested in seeing if a lower rate is available compared to your existing plan -LRB- Medigap plans are standardized -RRB- , please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . Consult with an experienced Medigap broker to see which plan would be most suitable for your specific needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most diabetic supplies are covered under Medicare Part B including blood sugar monitors , test strips and lancets . Medicare sets a limit on the number of lancets you can get during a 90 day period . If you need more your doctor must certify they are medically necessary . Medicare will not pay for any supplies -LRB- icluding monitors -RRB- sent to you directly that you did not order . You should always use a Medicare approved DME supplier that accepts assignment .
Walmart does accept Medicare Part B. Qualified Medicare recipients can purchase durable medical equipment , medical supplies , and other items covered by Medicare Part B in the Walmart pharmacy area . Walmart also is a participating provider in most Medicare Part D plans , and you can purchase drugs covered under Medicare Part D in a Walmart pharmacy .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance.It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Ostomy supplies may be covered under Medicare Part B. Whether Medicare will cover the supplies or not depends on how your doctor has documented the need for such supplies . Depending on the type of ostomy you have , Medicare may cover supplies for up to 3 months at a time , assuming you have met your Part B deductible .
Medicare Part A , in short , is your hospital insurance - Part B is your physician insurance . Part A provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Part B covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . You 're generally responsible for a deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 for Part A and $ 147 for Part B -RRB- and about 20 % of the healthcare expenses that are incurred during these visits - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . You may want to consider buying a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the other 20 % . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A and Part B cover services and supplies that are considered medically necessary to treat a disease or condition . Original Part A and B Medicare also cover some preventative services . If you have Medicare Part D or a Medicare Advantage Plan , many prescription drugs will also be covered .
Medicare Part B does not pay for IV antibiotics used at home but Medicare Part D might pay for the drug itself . In order to have the costs and supplies associated with administering the IV drug covered , it must be done as an inpatient under Part A or in a doctor 's office under Part B.
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is An Inspection Report For Life Insurance ?
An inspection report for life insurance is an extensive report that is done to verify confidential information about a life insurance applicant . Most inspection reports are done only on very large policies , and the majority are done by phone . With some multi-million dollar cases a face to face interview may be required . If the inspection report is for a business , it will ask about the nature of the business , make up of the business , location , where they do business , and if any air travel or travel to unsafe countries is involved . Personal information will include health problems , dangerous hobbies , tobacco use , drug/alcohol use , and anything else that affects life insurance risk . They will also ask income and net worth , liabilities , and justification for amount and purpose of life insurance . Inspection reports are ordered by the life insurance underwriter from private inspection bureaus and are kept confidential from everyone except the life insurance company that made the request .
An inspection report for life insurance is an extensive report that is done to verify confidential information about a life insurance applicant . Most inspection reports are done only on very large policies , and the majority are done by phone . With some multi-million dollar cases a face to face interview may be required . If the inspection report is for a business , it will ask about the nature of the business , make up of the business , location , where they do business , and if any air travel or travel to unsafe countries is involved . Personal information will include health problems , dangerous hobbies , tobacco use , drug/alcohol use , and anything else that affects life insurance risk . They will also ask income and net worth , liabilities , and justification for amount and purpose of life insurance . Inspection reports are ordered by the life insurance underwriter from private inspection bureaus and are kept confidential from everyone except the life insurance company that made the request .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Great question ! The first thing to do is contact your agent . The agent will give you a claims form , and if needed , inspect or arrange to have inspected , the damage . If your claim is for theft , be sure to have a copy of any police reports or other documentation available for him/her . It 's a simple process , and hopefully will go well for you . Thanks for asking !
The role of a life insurance underwriter is to evaluate and determine the degree of risk involved in issuing life insurance policies to persons applying for life insurance at their company . This could involve simply looking at the MIB and pharmacy record -LRB- for simplified issue , nonmed policies -RRB- all the way to reviewing hundreds of pages of medical records , tax returns , and/or inspection reports for very large policies . The underwriters ' role is to make sure that the insurance company they work for does not lose excessive amounts of money by charging too little , but does not lose business by charging too much . Underwriters are a very important part of a reputable and secure life insurance company .
Credit score usually is not a consideration for life insurance underwriting . However , if the face amount applied for is large enough to require a telephone interview or full blown inspection report , an applicant 's financial habits may come into play . While a person 's credit score does not have a direct bearing on the underwriting of the case , a bankruptcy may be considered by the underwriter .
The Best Homeowners Insurance Policy is available through Stillwater Insurance Company , formerly known as Fidelity National Insurance Company . This policy is the most affordable , customer friendly and nationally accepted home insurance policy . For newer homes which are well maintained and especially for homes greater than 3,000 square feet , Stillwater Insurance makes life much easier than the competition . There are multiple discounts which are easily applied to the already competitive rates , only exterior inspections are conducted thus alleviating some of the hassles of dealing with other insurance carriers . 24 Hour Claims Reporting is available along with extended Customer Service hours and a consumer friendly website for policy access . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
A homeowners policy can always be cancelled for non-payment of premium . In addition to the representations made to the agent , the underwriter also can order an on-site inspection . If the property isnt as described the policy can be cancelled . Some specific issues might be the presence of an aggressive dog , or poor maintenance of the home or grounds . Mortgage companies also report to insurance companies when a residence is vacant . The insurance company is likely to cancel the homeowners policy .
The short answer is it can . When buying a used car that has undergone some type of damage , the previous insurance company that paid out the claim will rate the damage on a scale of A - F. Here , D means the vehicle was involved in some type of serious collision . Here is the hypothetical where it could seriously effect your insurance . Lets say you buy a category D car . Lets also say you do not have it inspected by a certified dealership or certified mechanic before the purchase . Lets further assume there is chassis that goes unrecorded by a pre-purchase inspection . Now , while driving your new car you get into an accident and make a claim . The insurance company will take the position that any serious damage was there before you bought the car and a result of the previous accident . However , if we remove the assumption that you did not get an inspection , you can show the inspection to your current insurance company and get all of the damage related to your current accident covered by your claim . I hope this makes sense and helps .
Different companies may handle the claims settlement process differently , but this is my experience . Once you have discussed your loss with your Insurance Professional and have understood your coverage and your deductible and discussed your options , it will be time to report the claim . Usually within 24 hours , you should expect to hear from a Claims Services Representative -LRB- CSR -RRB- who will ask you for more details and want to know what you have done to protect from further damage . In some cases , if the loss is fairly simple and the estimate you have obtaned is within a certain amount , the CSR may send you a check at that time . If the loss is larger and more complicated , it will be assigned to a Professional Licensed Field Adjuster who will contact you and secure an appointment to inspect the damage , determine coverage and explain the procedure from that point . This person can also be a great resource a for referrals to licensed professional contractors should you need one . However , you are not obligated to use any of those contractors if you do n't want to . The Field Adjuster may issue preliminary payments to get the work started and supplemental payments as it progresses . Once the work is completed to your satisfaction and to the extent of coverage provided by your policy , the claim will be closed .
Oh wow , unfortunately there is no black and white answer to this question . It varies drastically from carrier to carrier but also from claim to claim . Your actual claim will determine a lot about how long the process will take to full resolution . If it is a simple `` fender bender '' where things are pretty cut and dry , you are talking a matter of a couple of days ... with our carriers and on claims like this as soon as the field adjustor can get out to inspect the car , they are usually cutting a check on the spot . If seen claims like this close in a day , but also have seem them take a couple of days to close simply due to scheduling issues . More serious claims take longer . If fault is in questions and police reports have to be pulled , this takes time . If there are serious injuries or death , these take a lot of time . Typically you do n't have to wait until the claim is settled to start the repairs on your vehicle . If you car is `` totaled '' you might have to wait until it is settled . Each claim and carrrier is different and you have the right to stay informed about the process . Your adjustor will no more than your agent so stay in contact with them and ask them direct questions about the length of time things should take and what you should expect during the process . Contact your local independent agent and ask them specifics on the claims process of their carriers .
That is a great question ! Yes , you will need to have proof of insurance to register your car , and to have it inspected . It must be insurance from here in Texas , so if you show up at the registrar 's office with your current out of State policy , they will turn you away . The car will have to be inspected annually , and current insurance coverage is required to do that also . Thanks for asking !
Most insurance companies will have a second inspection criteria . It normally requires you to get a contractor that will agree that there is damage , and provide a written , detailed estimate of those damages to the insurance company . They should then provide a second adjuster to inspect the damage with your contractor . Worst case , you can contact your state Department of Insurance . They should be able to help . They are free and part of their role is consumer protection .
Homeowners Insurance can be cancelled at any time by the Insured . The Insured may be required to submit a signed request to cancel the policy ; it is important to purchase a new policy and make sure it is effective the same date as the cancellation of your old policy . All policies have a Standard Time of inception and expiration at : 12:01 a.m. . There is an online link available to obtain a quote and purchase Home Insurance directly online in multiple States . The link is : WEBSITELINK If the reason for changing carriers is due to an issue with an inspection which was conducted -LRB- interior or exterior -RRB- on your property , we must advise that all carriers are now inspecting risks which means you will most probably have the same issue with another carrier . On the other hand , an insurance carrier has legal restrictions regarding the cancellation of an insurance policy ; they may only cancel a policy for any underwriting reason during the first 60 days of a new insurance policy . They may cancel a policy at any time for non-payment of premium following the State requirement for legal notice .
The cost of Homeowners Insurance can be controlled and/or reduced in several ways . You can generally obtain a cost reduction by having update inspections such as a 4 point , wind mitigationinspections , protective devices added such as a monitored alarm , storm shutters and in some cases increase your deductibles to offset the overal policy cost . If you live in a home that is over 20 years old , it is beneficial to have any updates documented by means of an inspection and share that with your insurance carrier . If your home is newer most of your policy credits may already be built into the policy but you may not need to carry the increased law & ordinance coverage and you may want to consider a higher dedcutible .
Damage to a structure from termites , ants and insects in general is not covered under the standard homeowner insurance policy . The underlying theory is that such damage is the result of infestation due to negligence on the part of the homeowner as the proximate cause of the occurrence . The homeowner is obligated to inspect for such damage and remedy the situation accordingly . Homeowner insurance covers structural damage that is sudden and accidental in nature . Infestation does not fit these criteria . Check with a qualified -LRB- recommended -RRB- and fully licensed pest control operation in your area . You may be able to purchase a policy or bond that would cover you for certain types of infestation after they have inspected and possibly treated your residence structure . We are talking about structural damages here . There could be coverage for damages that might occur from a roof collapse , for example , resulting from the infestation , that causes loss to other property within the dwelling . However , the infestation damage itself is not covered .
Although more information is needed to adequately address this very general question , a few points can be made . I am going to make the assumption that you are talking about physical damage to your vehicle , with no injury . If you are asking about dealing with the person who will physically inspect your vehicle , they or someone on their behalf should first contact you , to set up an inspection at your convenience . This is really an ` appraiser ' of the damages although they may also possess claim settlement authority to settle your claim on-site , in certain non-injury situations . If you are talking about a typical inside claim adjuster , expect a call from them , asking you to provide the details of the accident . After assessing the facts , the adjuster 's job is to make you whole for your loss , depending upon the liability circumstances involved . In both instances , you should expect to be treated with respect whether you are the policyholder or the person whose vehicle was damaged by another party . If you are not pleased with the process , tell the appraiser or adjuster so and then ask to speak to their superior . Hope this helps somewhat but a lot more information is needed to really help you .
Generally speaking a policy is cancelled for non payment of premium . That is by far the most common reason . Some states allow a carrier 60 days to decide if they will accept an applicant / insured which gives an insurer time to inspect and make some determination . After 60 days most states require the insurer to remain on the exposure till the end of the term at which time they can decide not to renew a policy . Property is different in a lot of ways from auto insurance . Carriers often put into effect moratoriums on new coverage in the instance of a natural disaster -LRB- flood , wind , Hurricane , wild fire , tornado , earthquake . -RRB- During these specified events a company may take the position that a policy was not authorized to be issued . Additionally , carriers often are faced with exposures they only find out about by doing a property inspection . So , it is not uncommon , for the policy to be written with as much information as is known by the agent , but then the risk emerges as being more subject to loss than they understood originally . All property insurance is somewhat reviewed in the general COPE formula for underwriting . COPE stands for Construction , Occupancy , Protection , and Exposure . Construction can mean the simple review of materials or the type of construction -LRB- i.e. Log homes -RRB- is not one the carrier wants . Occupancy sounds pretty simple , but there are houses that are not occupied , , seasonally occupied or even occupied by a business and not something the carrier wants . Protection stands for the type of protection afforded the structure/contents from loss . That could be as simple as what Public Protection Class , PC a home has -LRB- PC represents a grading system for fire departments in the US -RRB- or it can be an assessment of protection from a different peril i.e. burglary . And then lastly there is exposure . Here you might be thinking about the fact that the home is fine , but it is surrounded by brush in CA , or is a mile form an ocean , or is adjacent to a chemical factory . Lastly , keep in mind that a homeowners policy also has a section for liability coverage . If you have a trampoline in the yard , a swimming pool with no fence , a large or dangerous dog , a carrier may deem you to be an exposure they simply do not wnat .
This topic must be approached with great caution !!! Those shopping for home insurance most usually get involved in a self inflicted scam of shopping unlike products and end up making a final decision on something other than their goal ! It is very difficult to compare like coverage between insurance carriers ; thus allowing a true similar comparison . Carriers sometimes offer different deductibles , different coverage limits and different endorsement options . Depending on the customer 's needs , it is often that an important item goes unchecked in haste to complete the transaction . We recommend shopping for insurance not more frequently than once every three years and taking at least an hour to go over the coverage in detail before making a change of carrier.In today 's economy , there are clients that spend 10 - 15 minutes each and every year and simply contact someone after receiving an advertisement of a lower rate ; the topic of coverage goes untouched and the client saves $ 20 over the prior carrier 's premium . The truth will come out when there is a claim and the client questions why he/she did n't have the necessary coverage ; please do not fall into this trap - it defies the purpose of purchasing the insurance coverage in the first place . In some of these ` rush ' cases , it is also possible that following an inspection of the property , the carrier legally makes necessary changes and the client ends up with a higher premium than what they originally had with the prior carrier . It is prudent to purchase insurance at least one month ahead of the desired effective date to give the new carrier time to order an inspection and send notice of any changes which the homeowner may decide against . This would also allow you time to pay your renewal and continue with the prior carrier . The best recommendation in most parts of the United States is to try and find an insurance brokerage that represents a number of carriers ; you should call and speak to a broker explaining exactly what you 're looking for and supply a copy of your current policy for the broker to properly compare the coverage and endorsements and ask the broker to contact you if they can come up with a better offer without discounting any coverage . In addition , you may wish to contact a couple of the National Captive carriers such as Allstate and State Farm and obtaining a comparison quote . This way , you can compare the work of a broker against the Captive agents of Allstate or State Farm making sure you have completed a concise and informed cycle of review . For further information , you may contact WEBSITELINK and one of our agents will be happy to answer your more specific questions !
Most states require 30 days after you have established a residence ... but I have seen some people `` reside '' with a friend just across the border for years and never change it . Flags come up when taxes and insurance are not paid , or inspection stickers go out on tags . It 's according to what the state you 're in says . Check twice before you jump they always say .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Government Health Insurance Cheap ?
What do you mean by government health insurance ? If you are asking about a government health insurance plan such as Medicaid then I guess you could say it 's cheap as that is a program for the poor for which they do n't really pay anything . If you are asking about health insurance for Federal government employees they have many health insurance plan options at different price points to choose from . I do n't think many government employees think their health insurance is cheap even though their coverage is largely paid for by the government . Certainly in comparison to most of their peers in private sector companies these days most government employees pay less for their health insurance coverage .
What do you mean by government health insurance ? If you are asking about a government health insurance plan such as Medicaid then I guess you could say it 's cheap as that is a program for the poor for which they do n't really pay anything . If you are asking about health insurance for Federal government employees they have many health insurance plan options at different price points to choose from . I do n't think many government employees think their health insurance is cheap even though their coverage is largely paid for by the government . Certainly in comparison to most of their peers in private sector companies these days most government employees pay less for their health insurance coverage .
Health insurance rates are rising and will be continuing to rise for several reasons ; 1 -RRB- Healthcare costs are rising -LRB- physician services , prescription drugs , inpatient services -RRB- 2 -RRB- An aging population - the Baby Boom generation , the largest demographic segment of our population , have now aged to the point where they are in the prime years of life -LRB- age 40 + -RRB- that health problems begin to become common . 3 -RRB- Increased consumption of health care services in general - across the board , the American population in general is consuming more and a broader array of health care services than past generations . 4 -RRB- New treatments - from expensive new prescription drugs to new forms of technology like robotic surgery we have a wide range of advances in medical science that allow for the treatment of conditions that in the past there were little or no options available . Few of these new advances are cheap . 5 -RRB- New Conditions - from Autisim , to Celiac Sprue Disease to a variety of other conditions , we can diagnose and treat a range of conditions that were n't even recognized as existing in previous decades . 6 -RRB- Cost Shifting to Cover the Cost of Treating the Uninsured - the cost of providing care for the uninsured who can not pay their own medical bills is shifted over to higher costs for people who are insured . 7 -RRB- Cost Shifting to Cover Government Underpayment for Medicaid and Medicare - since the inception of these government programs in the 1960 's they have never paid the market rate for health care services and in many situations they pay less than the cost of the services these populations consume . This cost difference has also been shifted over to the insured population . 8 -RRB- Government Intervention in the Health Insurance System - with the passage of the Affordable Care Act and the many changes it imposes on health insurance benefits and the financing of health insurance such as doing away with pre-existing condition limitations & exclusions , making policies guaranteed to be issued regardless of health condition , mandating a broad new range of services be covered by all health insurance policies -LRB- for example all policies must cover maternity and pediatric dental and vision services even if you are a 50 year old single male -RRB- , providing subsidies for the purchase of heath insurance up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level and expanding Medicaid eligibility in many states are all factors that will contribute to increased demand for a finite resource . Regardless of one 's political or philosophical views of these changes , basic economics teaches us that higher demand for something for which there is a limited supply leads to higher prices . There are more factors that contribute to the ever increasing cost of health insurance but these are among the main driving forces behind the steady increase in health insurance rates people have been experiencing .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
How do you define cheap ? In 2014 the average monthly cost for a Silver level ObamaCare compliant major medical plan was $ 328 . By that standard any coverage costing less than that would be `` cheap '' . People who qualify for little or no subsidy of their individual health insurance -LRB- shame on you for making more than $ 42,000 annually -RRB- may argue that $ 328 or more per month for health insurance is n't affordable much less cheap . But the folks in Washington , D.C. know better about these things than you do . Some people who are healthy and are low consumers of health care services have turned to Short Term Medical plans as a more affordable option for health insurance coverage . And , indeed this may work out well for some people as Short Term Medical policies are generally cheaper than individual major medical policies . However , before pursuing this strategy you do need to be aware that Short Term Medical plans do n't cover pre-existing conditions , usually do n't cover preventive care , may not cover prescription drugs and may have other limitations . Also , they do not meet the criteria under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual coverage mandate and therefore can leave you vulnerable to a tax penalty for noncompliance . You should seek out an experienced health insurance agent to discuss your needs and options and to fully understand whatever health insurance product it is that you purchase .
By cheap I assume that you are referring to the premium . The cheap I like to think of is the cost when you have the claim and your company stands behind you and pays everything that you expected . Regardless of the premium , you will then know what cheap really means . A major property loss could take 100 years of premiums to pay for . Having correct coverage is the way to have the truly cheap homeowners policy , find an agent , one you can trust .
That 's a great question ! I 'd like to give you a bit of advice - some things are good to buy `` cheap , '' other things in the long run are better to spend a little more money on . Cheap shoes will hurt your feet , and wear out quickly . Buying a very cheap car often means spending a lot on constant repairs . Insurance is one of those things , especially for a young driver , that it is better to not go `` cheap '' on . You want better coverage , as you are much more likely to have an accident than an experienced driver would be . You will want a lower deductible , as you will inevitably end up needing repairs at some point . Please look for a local agent who can help you , or feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to give you some pointers . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! There is a reason why things are cheap . You buy a cheap car , you spend a lot on repairs . You buy cheap clothes , they rip or shrink . Term insurance is cheap because it has very few perks , like a whole life policy would . Your term policy will have no cash value , and will end at a specific time . Because there is no management of your cash involved , and the odds are great that the company will collect from you for years and not have to pay you anything , those policies can be sold very cheaply . About the only way that you can stack the odds back in your favor and get money out of your policy would be to get a `` return of premium '' policy or rider . For a larger premium payment , this allows you to receive back most of what you had paid into the policy . If you have questions , feel free to drop me a line , okay ? Thanks for asking !
NO ! NO ! NO ! Am I clear here ? If someone looked you in the eye and sold you this company 's coverage as true major medical insurance then you have been scammed . If you went to a web site and went `` Oh , cheap health insurance '' and then purchased it without reading the details you were still kind of scammed but you are also at some fault for not doing your homework . This is what is referred to as a limited benefit health plan . It probably does technically have some insurance components to it that are what are called `` indemnity plans '' which pay a fixed amount for a day in the hospital or for a visit to the doctor or towards other health services . These plans do not meet the legal requirements under ObamaCare to be defined as major medical insurance and to avoid the individual mandate tax penalty . In fact , they did n't meet the legal criteria to be called major medical plans before ObamaCare went into effect . Such plans were often marketed to businesses with lots of low income employees as a `` better than nothing '' alternative to more expensive group major medical plans . Sometimes they are also marketed to vulnerable individuals who do n't understand health insurance and that sounds like the case here . If your son is on a very tight budget then he will either qualify for very substantial premium subsidies in the government health insurance marketplace or for Medicaid . In either case he would have better , more affordable coverage through these options than what this outfit is selling . Also , please do my profession a favor and if an insurance agent has tried to sell you this coverage and told you it was major medical coverage please report him or her to your state 's insurance department for investigation .
As Peggy noted , it 's really cheap to buy life insurance on a newborn baby . The primary underwriting factor is the responses to yes or no health questions - there are no exam requirements for them because of their age -LRB- they 're babies ! -RRB- . Many parents look at buying a whole life policy because it 's very cheap and can be kept for life . A great rider to look at adding to a WL policy on a child is a guaranteed insurability option rider -LRB- GIO -RRB- - in short , this rider says that you can increase the face amount at certain intervals with no additional medical underwriting . Another option many parents consider is adding a child rider onto their own policy - this is a very cheap and easy way to add term coverage for your children . Let me know if I can be of further help . Thanks !
Remember cheap does n't mean better . What you want to find is a reputable company AND cheap rates . Compare your coverages as well as the rates - this is what I tell my clients . Another thing to look at is who is selling you the cheap rates - do you have a 1-800 telemarketer to talk to or a Licensed Agent who knows exactly what 's covered in your state ?
Any person eligible to purchase health insurance in the United States , with the exception of persons qualifying for Medicaid and/or Medicare is technically eligible to use the government health insurance marketplaces . Whether you would want to or whether it would make any sense for you to use them are other issues entirely . The government marketplaces will help determine if you would qualify for any premium tax subsidy for coverage purchased through their system . If you qualify for little or no premium subsidy then you may find that the government marketplaces may not best meet your needs . You will probably have larger selection of insurance carriers as well as possibly health plan and network options you may not find in the government marketplace . You should seek out the services of a health insurance broker to helpfind the best coverage for your situation . If you have coverage provider by an employer , and this coverage is deemed affordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act , -LRB- cost does n't exceed 9.5 % of your W2 income -RRB- then neither you nor your eligible dependents will be eligible for premium tax subsidies in the government marketplaces . This does not preclude someone from purchasing individual health insurance inside or outside of the government marketplaces and in some cases buying unsubsidized individual coverage for a dependent may be less expensive than adding them as a dependent onto your group plan .
Good question but think about it we need to ask ourselves a few questions before we go cheap sometimes cheap is good we all need to be good stewards of our money so the questions we should ask if answered honestly will be an indicator . Do I eat good healthy food ? Do I drink alcohol ? Do I work out at least 20 minutes 2 times a week ? How is my spiritual life ? Then we can decide which policy fits my need it can be fairly cheap but you must answer the questions and have a good consultant that cares about you not the money the money will come when we serve the people .
Cheap car insurance for young drivers is available ... If you know where to look ! Many reputable insurers offer low down-payments and cheap rates . Shopping for these best offers is best handled by an experienced auto insurance broker with preferably 20 years -LRB- or more -RRB- experience . Not only do we help our clients find the best deals , but our websites offer free information and advice that can often help reduce premiums . There are no fees or charges and taking care of clients is the top priority . Brokers do n't charge fees and we do the shopping so our customers save . That 's not a bad deal ! Try us and let us find cheap auto insurance prices for teenagers !
Generally speaking NO ... virtually all carriers who use any part of an ISO homeowners insurance contract will exclude flood . Flood insurance is underwritten and priced by the government through FEMA . There are several carriers who write flood insurance and there should n't be any real variance to the pricing between the carriers . Even if you do n't think your home or business would ever flood , check out the cost of flood insurance . You might be surprised how cheap it actually is ... I know what I 'm talking about on this topic . My office had 7 feet of water in it after back to back 100 years storms hit my area back in 2010 . I did n't have flood insurance -LRB- dumb agent I know -RRB- and had to come out of pocket to rebuild my unit . I have flood insurance now ... costs me about $ 350 a year !!
Term life insurance is cheap because it only pays out if death occurs during that period of time . The lower the age , the lower the actuarial risk of passing away , the lower the price . To get a policy that will be assured to be there to the end of life , the premium may be reasonable , but not necessarily `` cheap '' . Knowing it will be there for your loved ones at the time of need can definitely make it worth the cost . That is not to say there is not a need for cheap term life insurance . Thankfully , both Term and Permanent policies are available so that coverage is available and affordable for nearly anyone who wants it .
There are many carriers out there all can be quite `` Cheap '' But be careful when shopping for rates cheap does n't always mean you have the proper coverage . Also depends on what type of coverage you are looking for . When shopping online there are times that the rate is fantastic then you find out that they are not even allowed to sell insurance in your state . you also have to think about in the event of a claim can they be reached and you talk to someone local ? Buyer beware make you are covered properly like the old saying goes if it is to good to be true then most likely that is the case . However I do have some carries that I have a client in that has full coverage on a car and only $ 143 for 6 months of coverage with low deductible now that is cheap but her coverage is not . So the key is making sure you know what you are purchasing before you put the money out . A Local agent or the States insurance commissioners office can assist you in finding what you are looking for
Yes . Pre-existing health conditions such as Lupus can no longer be subject to a pre-existing condition exclusion , waiting period or be the cause for declining to cover a person . Now comes the part where I may part company with some of my peers . Unless you know a lot about health insurance and all the ins and outs of what the Affordable Care Act has caused insurance companies to do in redesigning their products , provider networks and prescription formularies , do n't go to Healthcare.gov for anything more than a cursory examination of what your options might be in the government marketplace and whether you will qualify for any subsidies . You can get a reasonable estimate of these factors without having to set up an account on Healthcare.gov through web sites such as HealthSherpa.com . Persons with chronic diseases , such as Lupus , especially need the services of an experienced health insurance broker who knows the intricacies of the health insurance products sold both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplace . It is not enough to just see that a particular health insurance carrier is available in the government marketplace and your decision should not be guided solely by the monthly premium . The person with a chronic health condition generally has existing relationships with primary and specialty care providers and may have already gone through a lengthy process of finding the correct medication -LRB- s -RRB- and services for the treatment of their condition . They may even want or require access to medical facilities and providers outside of their immediate area . YOU CAN NOT TAKE FOR GRANTED THAT ALL INSURANCE CARRIERS AND THEIR PRODUCTS , ESPECIALLY THOSE SOLD WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE , WILL HAVE YOUR PHYSICIANS OR FACILITIES AS IN-NETWORK PROVIDERS OR THAT YOUR MEDICATIONS WILL BE COVERED UNDER THEIR FORMULARY . Also , access to major centers of excellence like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic , Memorial Sloan-Kettering and others certainly can not be assumed . This is a major issue especially among health plans sold in the government marketplaces where positioning your product based upon price point is key to marketing success . One of the ways that some carriers have achieved this price point positioning is through the use of so called `` skinny '' networks . Which , as their name implies , offer a reduced selection of providers and often a much more stringent and restrictive list of approved medications . Before you enroll in any health insurance plan you need to confirm with both the insurance carrier and the heath care provider -LRB- s -RRB- that all or at least as many as possible of the pieces of your care system are going to be available to you . You also need to confirm in what manner they will be available to you . Can you continue to go directly to the specialists you have been using or must you have a referral from your primary care physician before you can access that specialist now ? Will your current medication arrangement be honored or will you have to reinvent the wheel by going through a step therapy process of using other medications and having unsatisfactory results before your current medication is approved by the new carrier ? What if you have been going to a center of excellence facility out of town once a year for follow-up exams and treatment , will the new carrier allow this ? These are just some of the crucial questions any person suffering from a chronic disease needs to ask and get answered before they choose a health plan in the era of the Affordable Care Act .
Regardless of whether or not a life insurance agency advertises cheap life insurance , the reality is that all life insurance companies must charge you the same price , no matter where you purchased the policy from . However , there are some factors that enter into whether you will find a cheaper policy at one agency over another . Some of these agencies ' methods are positive , and some are negative . Here are some examples of both . Positive 1 -RRB- The insurance agency takes all your health details and shops among multiple carriers to find the one that will issue your policy at the cheapest price . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency will sell you a policy that suits your need , not pressuring you to buy a more expensive policy just because it makes them more money . 3 -RRB- The insurance agent will go to bat for you if you are rated unfairly , and strive to help you resolve that , or find you another policy , if possible . Negative 1 -RRB- The insurance agency offers you a short term policy , or accidental death policy , just to make the sale . They do this whether or not that type of policy best suits your need . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency neglects to ask pertinent health details and then offers you a cheap policy . Or else they ask health details but still claim to be able to get you impossibly low rates , often out of ignorance . Ironically , to get the cheapest life insurance , you need a life insurance agent who is `` valuable '' . Go to someone you trust to listen to you , who will shop your case among multiple carriers to find your best price , and who will not sell you something worthless just to save off a few dollars and make the sale . That way you will have a policy of value at the most affordable price .
Boy , what a question . For me , it gets to the root of what is wrong with government these days . Im going to speak bluntly because I feel very strongly about this issue . Even though I sell life insurance for a living , I have had extensive experience in the medical insurance marketplace . I am also a consumer , and have to buy the product for myself and my family . And , I am a patriotic American who wants to see our country run the way it should be . Everybody needs medical care . If the insurance marketplace is left to run by its own devices , the vast majority of people will end up with a product that they like , at a price they can afford . If a small minority of people end up without coverage for whatever reason , their needs can be easily addressed . This could take place with a government safety net , an innovation by private companies , or some combination of the above . Either way , everyone will be able to have some form of coverage so that the cost of getting medical attention could be kept affordable . Beyond making sure that healthcare products and services are safe and secure , I cant see why government invention would be needed at all to make this system work . Next point : nobody is entitled to medical insurance . Frankly , nobody is entitled to anything . A government should not be in the business of providing the stuff to which we think we are entitled . The whole notion of government taking care of you from cradle-to-grave is horribly misguided . A gargantuan state and federal bureaucracy can in no way give each and every man , woman and child the treatment they deserve every day of their life . Last point : giving this gargantuan bureaucracy the legal power to force you to do business with it is a travesty of justice . We have made a horrible mistake by giving the federal government the right to tax or penalize us when purchasing health insurance . We have let it get much too cozy with the corporate providers of healthcare . Who exactly is benefiting by this illicit partnership ? Is it you ? Is it me ? Do we actually have the health insurance we need at a price we can afford ? Many Americans do not . So the answer to your question is yes , the United States government can force you to buy health insurance , and we have nobody to blame but ourselves for this sorry state of affairs .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Earthquakes ?
Earth movement is an excluded peril in most homeowners policies . Some insurance companies will provide earthquake insurance as an option . The companies are required by state law in some states to provide a quote and access to earthquake insurance . The premium for earthquake insurance in a known fault area can equal the premium for the homeowners policy .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
Homeowners Insurance does cover Swimming Pools as ` Other Structures ' which is usually 10 % of the Dwelling Coverage amount on the policy . A swimming pool is covered for the same perils that cover the home . The most common covered claim for a swimming pool would be a liability claim or medical payments claim for a slip and fall injury ; some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board or slide in order to avoid this risk . One of the more common questions regarding a swimming pool is coverage for cracks in the pool . Cracks are usually caused by land movement or earthquakes ; this is not covered on a homeowners policy . Earthquake coverage would need to be purchased to cover this sort of damage to a swimming pool ; however , the deductible and special limits will apply to swimming pools . Please review your coverage details prior to purchasing coverage .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
Home Insurance , Hazard Insurance or Property Insurance are synonymous general terms . 1 - 4 unit homes are usually protected by a Homeowners Insurance Policy -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy -LRB- Tenant Occupied -RRB- . The Homeowners Insurance Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Personal Property , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others most commonly written on Form HO-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . The Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Loss of Rent , and Premises Liabilitymost commonly written on Form DP-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Damages caused by the peril of earthquake under a homeowner policy are generally excluded from coverage . However coverage can be obtained in most States by purchasing either an endorsement to the homeowner policy for earthquake coverage or by acquiring a separate policy , specifically covering the peril of earthquake . Since some States and even regions within States are considerably more vulnerable to earthquakes , obviously the rates for this type of coverage varies widely . It can be expensive but your home is probably your most valuable personal investment . Consult with your local independent agencies for additional details to fit your particular situation and locality . .
A standard Renters Insurance policy does not cover the peril of earthquake . Renters Insurance will protect the insured 's personal belongings up to the policy limits provided . Some insurance carriers in various States will allow the addition of an Endorsement to include the peril of earthquake to the policy thereby including protection to your personal belongings that may be damaged by an Earthquake .
In California earthquake coverage must be offered every two years to the insured . It is not automatically covered . Earthquakes are relatively common in some parts of California and the cost for earthquake insurance reflects that frequency and the severity of the claims experienced in a given area . The coverage frequently has a reduced limit and a different deductible for earthquake related damage .
Earthquake damage is not covered by most home insurance policies . Earthquake coverage can be added to a policy through what is called a rider or endorsement . The cost depends on the likelihood of an earthquake .
Home insurance should primarily provide coverage for the reconstruction of the dwelling -LRB- house -RRB- in the event of a covered loss ; however , there are many other items that need to be covered in the event of a loss . It is usual and customary in most States for Flood and Earthquake risk to be excluded from the home insurance policy ; however , Flood Insurance and Earthquake Insurance is available even if it is with an alternate carrier . Consumers purchasing home insurance should make sure that the Dwelling , Other Structures , Personal Property , Loss of Use , Medical Payments and Personal Liability coverage is provided for on a policy.You may need some guidance regarding the limits of coverage ; you must particularly pay close attention to the Personal Property coverage since there are sub limits on every policy which apply to Jewelry , Furs , Silverware , Artwork etc. . . If you need more coverage , you may be able to purchase an optional endorsement allowing higher limits or you may need to obtain a current appraisal and purchase a Personal Article Floater -LRB- PAF -RRB- which will insure your high valued belongings . Many people rush through the insurance process later to find that they did n't spend the deserved time to review what they were buying . It is prudent to fully review your coverage at least once every 3 or 5 years .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
Most clients opt for minimum coverage and yet there are coverages that might be applicable to you that could save thousands of dollars . The first thing to consider is that neither flood , nor earthquake are covered . 25 % of property damage in the USA is caused by . . flood . Even if you are in a dry area consider getting a flood endorsement or policy . Earthquake coverage must be offered so the details about that coverage are normally available . Water damage from sewer back-up is a vital coverage particularly to older homes . Older homes also need coverage for ordinance changes that mean that your home would be more expensive to repair if there is a partial loss . A careful inventory of your personal property would probably uncover value that isnt covered by the policy . There are restrictions on several categories of propertywatch out . The last that I will mention is probably the most important , opt for the highest liability coverage that you can get from your company and then inquire into an umbrella . A lawsuit will ruin your weekend !!!
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Home insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . Home insurance is not a maintenance policy and it does not cover long term damage or wear and tear . Home insurance provides coverage for your dwelling , other structures -LRB- fence , shed ect . -RRB- , personal property and liability coverage . There are several optional coverages available including Water/Sewer Backup , Law and Ordinance , Earthquake , ect . You also want to make sure you purchase a Replacement Cost policy which will provide full value for your home , not a depreciated amount .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Earth movement is an excluded peril in most homeowners policies . Some insurance companies will provide earthquake insurance as an option . The companies are required by state law in some states to provide a quote and access to earthquake insurance . The premium for earthquake insurance in a known fault area can equal the premium for the homeowners policy .
In most cases no . If your policy includes earthquake and the damage is a result of the earthquake then there may be coverage , Homeowners insurance covers things like fire , lightening , hail wind , and other covered perils . They are not designed to cover normal deterioration and settling . Check with your agent to see what your policy covers .
It depends on the reason the foundation needs repaired . It may cover it if the damage was done by a covered peril . If however it is just due to age and ground water then no . If your policy covers Earthquake and the damage is due to Earthquake for example then your policy may provide some coverage . If you think you have damage that may be covered check with your agent .
Good Question . Earthquake coverage is typically not afforded under a renters policy in New York State . In other areas of the country it may be different - especially those areas that are susceptible to earthquakes . I do know of a few insurance companies that will add earthquake coverage on to the policy , however it can be costly . Hope this helps .
end question
start question
home-insurance
If you have $ 500,000 in jewelry -LRB- through inheritance -RRB- and art and you live in a $ 500,000 house , can you insure all the jewelry and art ?
Yes , of course , but there are some things an insurer may require . You stated through inheritance . That is good because an insurer would be curious how someone with a 500,000 house can afford to purchase 500,000 in jewelry Many states , do not require companies to file rates on what the industry refers to as `` Inland Marine '' coverage.So , there is often a willingness to insure a schedule of jewelry at a specific price point the insurer deems adequate.Lastly , many insurers have multiple rates for jewelry if yours will to put the carrier on notice of an item being put in a bank vault and then taken out , then an insurer will use what are referred to as `` Bank Vault rates '' while the property is in the Bank 's Vault and charge another rate if the item is out
Most homeowners policies do not have exclusions that would apply to the damage caused by a hurricane to the residence . If water enters the house through a normal door or window , coverage would be excluded . If a wall collapses and water enters the house , the personal property would be covered . There could be a restriction on the way that the loss of roofing material , art , stamps , money and jewelry is handled .
Mysterious disappearance is excluded under most home insurance policies and most , if not all , insurance companies will have an internal limit on jeweler y . They also limit other items such as monies & securities , fine arts , silverware , musical instrument , etc. . You can , and should , schedule your jewelry on the policy . This will give you coverage for a piece of jewelry being lost or stolen and defines the amount of coverage through an appraisal .
To protect yourself against financial devistations should you experience a covered loss . In the state of Wisconsin if you are involved in an accident that your are deemed responsible for and an adult has died as a result of the accident you are financially responsible for 350000 for that death and if a child has died as a result of the accident you are responsible for 500000 . This is called the wrongful death act . Do you have enough coverage ?
Let me add one point . Theft and Mysterious disappearance are two separate things . So talk with your agent . Theft coverage will respond if there is evidence of a theft . For example a broken door lock or other evidence that someone gained access to your premises . The broader coverage available from some carriers can include mysterious disappearance which is basically that the insured item is not where you believed it to be and therefore has been possibly stolen or you simply do not understand how it disappeared . Mysterious disappearance is generally more expensive than theft , and is generally purchased in-connection with protecting valuable articles of jewelry , watches and furs or other property that have their own sub limits in a homeowners or renters policy . Read the policy relative to how jewelry , watches and fine arts are protected and if it does not sound like enough coverage talk to your agent .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
There are certain insurance companies out there that specialize in the `` Luxury home '' market . Some the value must start at $ 750,000 and some are at $ 1,000,000 but then they give you much higher limits on things fine art , jewelry , wine collection , sewer back-up , etc. . Fireman 's Fund , ACE and Chubb are three such companies that have these policies .
Flood is a peril that is specifically excluded under a renters policy . Flood is generally caused by inundation of rain , tidal water or mudslide . If you had a pipe burst in your unit that would likely be covered if you had an ISO form HO-4 Renters policy . Keep in mind that there are limitations on expensive items such as jewelry , money & securities , fine arts etc. .
Most Home Insurance policies cover theft of personal property up to the limits set in the policy terms , regardless of location . However , there are also certain restrictions and exclusions for this . The limits and coverage will vary depending on what State you live in , so you 'll need to check your policy documents to be sure . For example , in California , most policies are written sooff-premises theft coverage is limited to a certain percentage of the total for Personal Property coverage , usually 10 % . However , if the theft occurred during a move from one residence to another , and happened within 30 days from the time the move started , then this restriction is waived . There are usually also specific limits for various types of property , such as jewelry , fine art , firearms and etc. . These limits will typically state limits such as $ 1000 per item / $ 5000 per loss or something similar . There will also be a list of items not covered unless a specific rider is attached . And there are also typically instructions on what happens if the property is eventually recovered .
Yes , of course , but there are some things an insurer may require . You stated through inheritance . That is good because an insurer would be curious how someone with a 500,000 house can afford to purchase 500,000 in jewelry Many states , do not require companies to file rates on what the industry refers to as `` Inland Marine '' coverage.So , there is often a willingness to insure a schedule of jewelry at a specific price point the insurer deems adequate.Lastly , many insurers have multiple rates for jewelry if yours will to put the carrier on notice of an item being put in a bank vault and then taken out , then an insurer will use what are referred to as `` Bank Vault rates '' while the property is in the Bank 's Vault and charge another rate if the item is out
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
Jewelry is covered under a homeowners policy . Most homeowners policies have an internal limit to the amount of coverage for jewelry . Under the homeowners policy the loss of jewelry is subject to the deductible on the policy . People are rarely satisfied with the adjustment made on jewelry under their homeowners policy . A jewelry floater is supplemental coverage that can be provided and it will replace the lost jewelry or pay a stated amount . This coverage must be backed up by an appraisal . There isnt usually a deductible on a jewelry floater .
The cost of an individual health insurance policy will be different , depending on your age , where you live , the type of coverage you are going to purchase , and until 2014 , your health conditions . In most areas of the country , there are several top-rated companies that offer affordable personal plans . Whether you need short-term or long-term benefits , there should be many options available . Working with an experienced broker will help you find the plan that best fits with your specific situation . We utilize a combination of decades of experience , top-notch websites and state-of-the art software . No fees of course . Federal tax subsidies become available in the future and they could reduce your premium .
A standard renters insurance policy does cover jewelry loss or damage , if as a result of a covered peril . However , these policies contain a limit to the amount that will be paid for each jewelry item . The limits are generally $ 1,000 or $ 1,500 for each piece or a set amount for all jewelry lost or damaged at one time by one occurrence . So , obviously you could have jewelry that is worth a lot more than you would receive in the event of a covered loss . If such a situation exists for you , consider buying additional insurance based on the values of the jewelry . This can be done on an endorsement or separate policy . Check with your agent as to your options . Also , be aware that some pieces may need to be appraised before determining the premium you will be charged .
I am in agreement with the answers above , but will add that not all Annual Renewable Term Life Insurance guarantees renewability for the following year without some health underwriting . In fact , most ART policies are only guaranteed renewable for a set number of years , which can be as short as one or three .
The IRS does not look favorably on any personal insurance deductions such as car , home , boat , jewlery or fine art insurance or rental insurance . However , Renter 's Insurance Can be tax deductible if you operate a business out of your home . In order to claim the renters insurance as a valid deduction you must allocate a certain percentage of your home as your office space and that portion theirof is tax deductible as part of eligible expenses . If you do not own a business , you can not deduct your renter 's insurance
Most health insurance plans do not cover In Vitro or any other infertility treatment . Most ART procedures are considered elective . Fifteen states have insurance mandates requiring some coverage for infertility . Nine of those state mandates include IVF . All the mandates are full of exceptions and loopholes . If your employer is headquartered in one of those states , your group health plan may be subject to the mandate . Your alternative is to purchase the best possible coverage for a hopeful pregnancy : primary health insurance , short term disability , and hospital indemnity .
Annual renewable term has two elements . It provides life insurance protection for one year and it promises to insure you again for a subsequent year . Most companies include the renewal rates for each policy year in the policy itself . If you know when you will die , an ART policy might be the best fit .
Annual renewable term life insurance or ART as it is known by the life insurance industry allows a person to purchase the maximum face amount at the lowest premiums . These policies automatically renew without proof of insurability every year . However , these policies have an annual increase with age . The older a person becomes the steeper the increases become .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Do I Join Medicare Part D ?
If you are eligible for Medicare and covered by Medicare Part A or Part B , you are also eligible to purchase a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan . Drug plans are offered and administered by private insurance carriers . The plans must be approved by CMS . Plans vary by zip code .
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
If youre signing up with a Part D plan for the first time , you may do so in one of three different enrollment periods , depending on your circumstances : The initial enrollment period - If youre not yet in Medicare and have no other drug coverage thats creditable -LRB- considered as good as Medicares -RRB- , you can join a drug plan at any time during your seven-month initial Medicare enrollment period . This lasts from three months before to three months after the month you turn 65 -LRB- or , if youre younger with disabilities , the month you receive your 25th Social Security disability payment -RRB- . You can also use this IEP if you turned 65 while living abroad or in prison . It lasts from three months before to three months after the month of your return or release . The special enrollment period - Youre entitled to an SEP in certain circumstancesfor example , if you lose creditable drug coverage -LRB- such as from an employer or union -RRB- , or you turned 65 before moving abroad or going to prison and now want Part D coverage on your return or release . You do not have to request an SEP in these circumstances , but can just go ahead and sign up with a plan . This kind of SEP lasts 63 days and you must be receiving Part D coverage before it expires to avoid a late penalty . The annual open enrollment period If you miss your deadline for joining Part D during an IEP or an SEP , then you can not enroll in a drug plan until the next OEP . This enrollment period -LRB- which until the end of 2010 ran from November 15 to December 31 -RRB- now runs from October 15 to December 7 each year . You also have to wait for an OEP if you deliberately drop creditable drug coverage that you already have -LRB- for example , from an employer or union -RRB- . The OEP also serves as an annual opportunity for anybody already enrolled in Part D to switch from one plan to another .
The first Medicare Part D open enrollment period began Nov 15 , 2005 and ended May 15 , 2006 . Part D of Medicare , also called the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit , went into effect on Jan 1 , 2006 . You yourself can join Medicare Part D from three months before your 65th birthday .
Medigap and Part C are not the same . Medigap is supplemental coverage to your Original Medicare Part A and B . You do n't have to buy a Medigap Plan , it is optional . Many people , however , use the Medigap Policy to help cover the 20 % of Medicare approved costs not covered by Part A and B. Medicare Supplement insurance is private insurance in which you pay a premium every month . You are allowed to visit any provider who accepts Medicare . Part C is called a Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO , so you are restricted to using network doctors . This type of Plan combines Part A , Part B , and usually Part D -LRB- drug coverage -RRB- . It 's important to note , if you join a Medicare Advantage Plan , you do n't need and ca n't be sold a Medigap Policy . In other words , you ca n't buy a Medigap Policy to supplement your Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Medicare Part D became effective on January 1 , 2006 . It is available to persons enrolled in Medicare Part A and B for prescription drug payment assistance , by joining a PDP -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . Or you can join a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- MA -RRB- that covers services and drugs in one plan .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
USAA was formed by military officers for military officers and enlisted personnel . Anyone who is currently in the military , or retired with an honorable discharge can join . There are ways to join if you are n't or were n't in the military . These are : One of your parents was in the military and has purchased an auto or home policy ; You are a widow/widower or former -LRB- unremarried -RRB- spouse of a member who had purchased auto or home insurance ; Attending one of the service academies or in advanced ROTC at a college/university . I 'm not sure how many generations a membership can be passed down . I have a membership through my father-in-law who served in the Navy during WWII , and my son has a membership through me and my wife . I think a membership can only be passed down two generations , but I do n't know that for sure . It 's a great organization . If you are eligible , I strongly recommend you join . They have lots of great benefits besides insurance .
Medicare is a type of health insurance available to those over the ge of 65 and people with disabilities that have received social security income for more than 24 months . Coverage on Medicare works differently than traditional health insurance one is used to before joining the Medicare system , though many aspects are the same . Medicare has four parts , A -LRB- hospital coverage , the part that is `` premium free , '' for those who worked at least 40 quarters before becoming eligible -RRB- , B -LRB- outpatient coverage , which has a monthly premium , currently $ 115 for most -RRB- , C -LRB- Medicare Advantage , which replaces A and B -RRB- , and D -LRB- optional prescription drug coverage -RRB- .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
To get Medicare Part D , you first have to find the Medicare drug plan that you want to join . Then you can go to that plan 's website and enroll online , or complete a paper form enrollment , or call that plan 's phone number , or call Medicare at 1-800-633-4227 . This website is helpful in selecting your plan and telling you where and how to enroll . WEBSITELINK
Enrollment in a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan -LRB- Part D / PDP -RRB- is not mandatory . However , if you do not enroll in a Medicare approved Prescription Drug Plan , youll still need creditable prescription drug coverage to avoid a late enrollment penalty if you decide to enroll later on . To avoid the late enrollment penalty : Join a Medicare drug plan when you are first eligible and before your initial enrollment period is over . Dont allow 63 days or more in a row without a Medicare drug plan or other creditable prescription drug coverage . If you choose to delay getting a PDP plan , you are not penalized until you decide to enroll . This does come as a surprise to some people who choose to wait to buy a Medicare PDP plan after being on Medicare for some time . To calculate a late enrollment penalty fee , first determine how many months you went without creditable drug coverage . For example 43 months at a rate of $ 31.17 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- is 43 X .3117 = $ 13.40 . So , in addition to the monthly PDP premium , you would pay a $ 13.40 late enrollment penalty . You may have to pay this penalty for as long as you have a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan . In addition , the penalty rate may increase each year . This was a great question . I hope this answer was helpful .
The Patient Portability and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- commonly known as Obamacare is not a law that you have to have health insurance . It does require insurance companies to allow you to join an insurance plan regardless of your past health history . This would be extremely expensive for the insurance companies if only sick people joined the plans and healthy people did not . Because of this , a tax was set up to encourage everyone to join a plan . If you do not sign up for a health plan by March 31 , then you will owe a tax on your income tax next year equal to 1 % of your income or $ 95 dollars , whichever is more . More importantly though , if you do not sign up for health insurance , you wo n't have health insurance . Even the healthiest person could contract an illness or injury and need medical care . With medical expenses getting higher every year , paying a few hundred dollars each month to ensure that you wo n't have to pay thousands unexpectedly is a good trade off . The deadline is approaching quickly , so please contact a local broker and sign up for health insurance .
401K plans have been one of the primary ways people who work save for retirement . It is what is known as a qualified plan meaning that it is subject to government enforced rules and regulations regarding how money goes into it , how much can go in , how it comes out and how much at one time . Employers offer these plans and agree to put in a certain amount -LRB- in some cases , not all -RRB- so that an employee can grow their nest egg while working . The funds grow tax deferred -LRB- no taxes due till funds are distributed to employee -RRB- , typically have options as to where you will invest them and traditionally accumulate over time . You can ask your employer about their 401K plan if they offer one . You usually have to work with them for a few months or a year before you beome eligible to join .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you have paid into Medicare through payroll taxes for 40 quarters and are drawing on Social Security at age 65 , you will automatically be enrolled in Medicare . If you are younger and wanting to join Medicare , you do so by paying Medicare taxes . They are charged for self employed , employees , and government workers , so simply working at a legitimate job will get you on the road to receiving Medicare when you are age 65 + .
Great question ! To sell insurance , you will need a license from your state 's department of insurance , and product training . Are you looking at joining a particular company ? Many of them will help you in finding an exam study course to help you with the licensing exam , fingerprinting , etc. . It can be very pricy at the beginning to cover the fees for the steps involved in your licensing , so be prepared . Before you can sell some products , you will have to complete the company 's training courses . Each state that you would like to sell in will require a license also . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Does Full Coverage Auto Insurance Cover ?
Insurance premiums vary greatly and are determined by many different factors . Among other things , the type of coverage you have , the benefit levels you are seeking , age , gender and zip code are other factors an underwriter will consider in arriving at an appropriate premium rate for the quoted coverage .
A hybrid life insurance policy blends both non-medical and fully underwritten coverage . The idea is you get a portion of the death benefit being applied for as full coverage without an exam -LRB- the rest being AD&D coverage -RRB- and the rest turns into full coverage after an exam is completed and you 're approved . The initial process can be completed in just a few days -LRB- typically 48 hours or so -RRB- - when the exam is completed , it can take a few weeks for the underwriting to be wrapped up . Once the initial non-medical coverage is in force , you can then decide to take an exam to turn the rest of the coverage into full coverage -LRB- you generally have a window of about 6 months to complete the exam - can vary by carrier -RRB- . Even if you come up with poor numbers and are declined for the rest of the coverage being turned into full coverage , you can still keep the initial format of the plan because it 's already in force . It 's probably easier to envision with an example . If you apply for $ 250,000 of coverage with a 20-year term period under a hybrid life policy and you 're approved for the non-medical side -LRB- again , typically takes only a couple of days -RRB- , only a portion of the coverage will be full coverage . So let 's say the coverage is actually $ 100,000 of full coverage and $ 150,000 is AD&D -LRB- actual ratios will vary by carrier -RRB- . This means that if you died without completing the exam and getting the rest of the coverage approved , only $ 100,000 would be paid out instead of the full $ 250,000 . The only way the full $ 250,000 would be paid is if you died under accidental means -LRB- e.g. a car accident -RRB- . It sounds like a great idea on paper , right ? You 're getting coverage quickly and you 've got something locked in in case you ca n't qualify for the full coverage transition . There 's a huge issue with this type of program !!!! The RATE PER $ 1,000 of full coverage that you 're paying under a hybrid life policy can -LRB- and likely will be -RRB- A LOT higher than you would be paying for coverage under a traditional life policy - meaning you can end up spending a ton of extra money on premiums unnecessarily that could easily be in your own pocket . The chances of a claim for AD&D coverage is slim to none . You 're most likely to die from illness than you are to die from injury . *** You want to be paying the lowest cost per $ 1,000 of full coverage - this is the key point you want to look at when you 're buying your coverage . *** Think about it this way . If you 've got a $ 250,000 non-medical policy and a $ 250,000 hybrid policy , and the premium for the hybrid policy is less , you 're actually paying a much higher rate because only a portion of the face amount is full coverage , where as the entire face amount under the regular non-med policy is 100 % full coverage . But you can just take the exam and turn it into full coverage right ? Problem solved ? - NO !!! If you 're willing to take an exam in the first place , you may as well have just done a traditional fully underwritten program to start with , because the premiums for those programs are substantially less than they are for hybrid policies and you have full coverage from day 1 . The long and short of it is this - if you do n't want to take an exam , buy a non-medical policy . If you 're willing to take an exam to lower your premiums or secure a higher amount of coverage , apply for a fully underwritten program because you 're going to get much better rates . The idea with hybrid policies is to try to get the best of both worlds , but the process just does n't make much sense with how much you 're spending for full coverage . I hope this provides some clarification for you . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Life insurance can cover death in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- Full coverage 2 -RRB- AD&D Full coverage means that the life insurance policy will pay out a death benefit regardless of whether death occurs by illness -LRB- including old age & natural causes -RRB- or injury . This is the most common type of life insurance that is purchased because a person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are by an injury -LRB- e.g. car accident or a plane crash -RRB- . AD&D is short for Accidental Death & Dismemberment . This kind of life insurance , while typically cheaper than full coverage , only pays out a death benefit if death occurs due to injury -LRB- the types of injuries that are covered may be outlined in the plan as opposed to general language -RRB- . Given that the average person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are from injuries , full coverage is a much more desired option for people . If a person dies by illness and has an AD&D policy , this coverage will not pay out a death benefit . It 's important to consult with an experienced life insurance broker to compare your options and help you determine the type , amount , and length of coverage that will be most suitable to your needs and budget and which carrier can offer that coverage at the lowest rates . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an experienced life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a term insurance policy may be more suitable to the need than a permanent policy . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Once you 've figured out how much coverage you want and how long you need it for , you then need to find the carrier 's program that is going to offer the coverage at the lowest possible cost . This is where the risk classification comes in . This is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for . You also want to make sure of the type of coverage you have - full coverage or Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- . With full coverage , the proceeds are paid out whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under an AD&D policy , the policy only pays out if you die by a specified circumstance -LRB- e.g. a car crash -RRB- - if you die by illness and you have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit . This is important because people see the price of an AD&D policy and it looks very attractive because it 's cheap . That 's because you 're more likely to die by illness than you are of an injury . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
All insurance auto policies are the same they all have liability which is damage to other . Then you have optional coverage of un insured and under insured and medical pay then of course the option of `` Full '' coverage which really is not the best choice of words for coverage but that is coverage that repairs your auto in the even of a loss minus the deductible . The best coverage would be to have higher limits and full coverage . How ever you budget needs to thought about also . If you are purchasing all the coverage and ca n't afford the higher deductible then full coverage may not be the best option for you . Before you ever purchase a car or insurance shop around call a local agent and discuss what options you have . Many agencies demand that you have certain limits which is recommended to have the higher limits but it is pointless if you ca n't afford the higher limits because if it means eating or insurance well you going to choose food . Talk to an agent who will listen to your concerns and find you the most affordable rate and coverage that your desire . Online quotes can sometime be lower but the service sometimes is not as well as an agent example at our agency you can reach us 24/7 we never want you to ever have to call a 800 number and talk to a stranger .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
As I illustrated recently to a class of high school freshmen , that is really a complicated question but let me clarify full-coverage first . Insurance agents only use that term when someone else introduces the subject . We know that full-coverage does not mean that the insurance company will make everything right all the time . Policies have limits , claims are adjusted and there are a great many places where there could be misunderstandings . An insurance policy has two major sections , liability and property damage . Many people think that if they have coverage in both sections they have full-coverage . If they cause an accident and people are injured , they might well be sued . The liability portion of the policy will stand between them and the injured party until the judgments and expenses exceed the liability limits written in their policy . These limits can range from $ 15,000 to over $ 1 million . So if someone is injured and sues and wins a judgment in the amount of $ 50,000 , your full-coverage policy might not meet your needs and the court might be looking at your other assets to satisfy the judgment . A similar disagreement can arise with property damage . This is settled on actual cash value , unless you have a rare policy with agreed value coverage . There are two problems which present themselves . You might really love your little Ford Focus that you bought two years ago and when it is damaged disagree with the adjuster on the value of the car . When the car is inspected the adjuster may decide that the car can not be repaired economically . The adjusted value presented will probably be less than you expected because there is a deductible which will be taken out of the settlement . Again , your full-coverage policy may not cover you in the way that you want . However , you asked about cost and in California the cost is dependent on the year , make and model of the vehicle , where the vehicle is registered , the driving record of the members of the household , the annual mileage of the vehicle , and then the coverages that you select . Companies offer discounts and sometimes assess penalties based on driving histories , other types of coverage , the occupation of the principal operator and other factors . The answer to how much it costs is , it depends .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
I like to look at this question a little differently . There are basically three parts to your auto insurance policy . One part covers you if you hurt somebody -LRB- or something -RRB- . A second part covers you and your family if someone hurts you and does n't have any insurance or not enough to reimburse you for your injuries/suffering/lost earnings . A third part covers the car you may be driving should it be damaged . How much coverage would you expect someone to have if they hurt you or a family member ? That is a good guide for how much liability coverage you should consider . Your liability limit for others and uninsured/under-insured motorists limit for you should be consistent . If someone or something damaged your car , would you want to be reimbursed ? If so , your auto insurance should include comprehensive and collision coverage . Older fully paid car ? Still may be worth several thousand dollars and well worth insuring . It 's better to have a higher deductible than no coverage at all . If your insurance coverage meets these tests , this may be the best insurance coverage for you . Then I like to consider insurers who will also provide my homeowner 's / tenant 's coverage through a respected local agent with reasonably competitive premiums .
Auto insurance is not a maintenance contract and does not cover any type of auto repair not caused by an accident . Auto insurance covers liability if you are sued , medical payments for persons in your car , protection from uninsured drivers , and if you have full coverage it will cover collision damages and under the comprehensive , glass , vandalism , and any loss other than collision caused by an accidental occurrence .
Full coverage on auto insurance covers the physical damage done to YOUR vehicle . Liability coverage only will cover claims brought against you in an accident . `` Full coverage '' has two parts , comprehensive coverage -LRB- if a tree falls on your car , or a hail storm does damage to your vehicle , basically most occurrences when you are not in the vehicle -RRB- , and collision coverage , which covers the physical damage done to your vehicle in an accident . You can choose to get comprehensive only , or comprehensive and collision , but not collision without comprehensive . Note : the deductibles for each can be different . You will typically save more money by raising your collision deductible compared to raising your comprehensive deductible .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Graded death benefit whole life insurance is permanent coverage that features an alternative structure in the first 2 or 3 years of the policy -LRB- depending on the insurance company -RRB- . The program will feature one of two graded benefit methods . 1 -RRB- Return of premium - if death occurs during the graded period , any premiums paid into the policy is given to the beneficiary . If death occurs under accidental means , then the full benefit is still payable . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of whether death occurs due to illness or injury . Some carriers may offer interest on your premiums if the insured passes away during the graded period - be sure to review your policy to see if it 's under your policy . The return of premium structure is more commonly seen under graded benefit whole life policies . 2 -RRB- Reduced death benefit - if death occurs during the graded period , the coverage will payout a specific percentage of the death benefit , depending on which year during the graded period death occurs . For example , if death occurs during the first year of the policy , the carrier only pays 30 % or 35 % of the death benefit -LRB- depending on the carrier -RRB- - 70 % or 75 % if death occurs during year 2 . If death occurs under accidental means during the graded period , then the full benefit is payable . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under final expense policies -LRB- another name for small whole life policies with face amounts of $ 25,000 or less -RRB- , the responses to the health questions determine whether you will qualify for a level benefit -LRB- immediate full coverage -RRB- or a graded benefit . Typically , to qualify for a level benefit , all the health questions have to be answered no . Please note , just because you may not be able to answer all health questions no for one carrier 's program , does n't mean you would n't be able to answer no to all questions for a different carrier . Each insurance company has their own questions that they ask so one carrier may be able to consider a level benefit where another may not . The wording to the questions is critical to pay attention to . If you ca n't qualify for traditional final expense coverage , you always have the option for GUARANTEED ISSUE whole life . These programs do not ask any health questions whatsoever . They will feature the return of premium graded period . When buying any whole life insurance policy , be sure to remember 2 things : 1 -RRB- Do the premiums remain the same for the entire life of the policy ? - Some policies feature banded premium - meaning they go up every 5 years . They may be cheaper up front during the first couple years , but can cost significantly more over the long run . 2 -RRB- What age does the coverage carry you to ? - Some policies will only carry you to age 80 or to age 90 - and if you live beyond that age , your policy automatically terminates . It 's best to set yourself up with something that guarantees the coverage will remain in place for life -LRB- as long as you continue to pay your premiums of course -RRB- . I always suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare multiple insurance policies with your medical history to make sure you 're getting the desired coverage at the lowest possible cost . There is no cost to doing so . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Medicare covers 3 types of `` lift chairs '' -3 position , infinite lift , and zero gravity . Medicare only pays for the `` lifting mechanism '' . Each company may cover this item in varying degrees . I would suggest that you go the dealer you wish to purchase this item through and let them interface with your insurance company to tell you how much your company is going to cover and how much you will have to pay . The possibility of medicare covering this item in full is small
Auto coverage will vary slightly depending on your state . However auto insurance is typically broken down into the following coverages : Liability Bodily Injury - Pays to cover the medical expenses of the damaged party -LRB- typically another driver and their passengers -RRB- if you cause an accident . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . There is a limit per person and an aggregate limit per accident . Liability Physical Damage - Pays to cover damage to vehicles or other physical property -LRB- mailbox , guardrail , traffic signal , etc. -RRB- caused by the insured -LRB- you -RRB- . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . Uninsured Motorist Liability & Uninsured Motorist Physical Damage - This coverage protects the insured against motorists without insurance or with insufficient limits to cover medical and physical damages to the insured . This pays up to the per person and aggregate limits listed on the policy . Collision - Pays the cost to repair/replace your vehicle if you hit something/someone minus the deductible listed on your policy . Note that if your vehicle is a total loss then you will be compensated based on the actual cash value of your vehicle which is the value of your vehicle considering depreciation . Other Than Collision -LRB- Comprehensive -RRB- - This coverage pays to repair/replace your vehicle for theft , vandalism , hail , damage by animals , etc minus the deductible on your policy . If your vehicle is a total loss it will be valued on an actual cash value basis . Personal Injury Protection - Pays for medical/disability expenses of the insured for an injury occurring in or around your vehicle up to the limit listed on the policy . Accidental Death & Dismemberment - Small life insurance component often added to auto policies that will pay a death benefit if you die or are permanently disabled in an auto accident . Towing/Roadside Assistance - Varies significantly by company and state Rental Coverage - Covers the cost of a rental vehicle for the time that your vehicle is in the shop due to a covered loss . There are multiple levels and this coverage may not cover the full cost of the rental .
Medicare covers a preventive screening visit when you 're new to Medicare and yearly `` wellness '' visits . A full annual physical exam would not be covered at 100 % . The new to Medicare preventive visit can be completed one time within the first year your Part B is active and includes a review of your medical history , discussion about preventive services -LRB- e.g. certain screenings , shots , etc. -RRB- , ht/wt measurement , blood pressure check , vision test , and a BMI index check . The yearly `` wellness '' visits can be completed once every 12 months if you 've had Part B for longer than a year . The purpose of the wellness visits is to develop and monitor a plan to help prevent disease and disability based on your health . Your would complete a health risk assessment with your doctor as well . Like the welcome to Medicare preventive visit , these visits include a review of your medical history , ht/wt check , and a blood pressure check . These test are only covered at 100 % if you 're doctor accepts Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . Otherwise , you would be responsible for a portion of the costs -LRB- typically 20 % coinsurance -RRB- and the Part B deductible may apply -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . You can also be subject to paying for other services that are conducted during the visit if they are not covered as part of the preventive visit benefits -LRB- e.g. blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- . Typically , original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only covers about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . You may want to look at supplementing your coverage with a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as a Medicare supplement plan -RRB- to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of more assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Insurance Companies Can I Get For Under $ 200 Or Less ?
It is not the insurance company that will determine if you can get a policy under $ 200 . It is your age , health , the type of policy you get , and the face amount of the policy . Visit one of the websites on this site that offers `` instant quotes '' , and input some different face amounts and policy types to see if you can find one with a premium that low . Then call that website to confirm if you qualify for it . Sometimes we have even lower priced options that are too hard to plug into a quote engine . If you get the right agent , it will always be to your advantage to talk to them and let them shop for you .
There are two methods of calculating the value of loss items in insurance : Replacement Cost Value -LRB- or RCV -RRB- , and Actual Cash Value -LRB- or ACV -RRB- . Depreciation is used to calculate ACV . With RCV , you are only concerned with the replacement cost of the loss items . For example , ifI purchased a 32 inch flat screen TV 5 years ago , I might have paid $ 900 for the TV . But tobuy that exact same TV now might only cost $ 200 . So , I would get RPV of $ 200 , because that is the cost to replace my loss item . -LRB- This could also work the other way . If that exact same TV now is $ 1,200 , I would get that amount instead -RRB- . With ACV , we use depreciation to determine the actual cash value of the loss item . So with my $ 900 TV that I bought 5 years ago , each year that I 've owned the item its ` valuewill be less . Eventually , my TV will only beworth the amount I could get to scrap it . After 5 years , that TV is only worth $ 50 , because the actual value of that TV has depreciated .
There are many factors and unanswered information that is needed . What type of sports car what year and your driving record and what state you are in . I can tell you that I have an insured that has his newerFerrari and is in his mid 40 's and is paying less then 200 a month full coverage of course but with 0 deductibles . But he also has and older Ferrari and it had full coverage and pays 200 a year for it with 0 deductible . So to be able to give you a more accurate answer you would need to provide more information
Great question ! The short answer is that it should , assuming that the damage was n't caused by some form of negligence . The thing to consider though , is this - how much was the estimate for the repair of the damages ? Would it be less than the cost you will incur if / when your premiums increase after filing a claim for that damage ? For example - the estimate to repair is $ 200 . You file a claim , and the company pays it , and then increases your premiums by $ 30 , let 's say . Your cost for insurance that year now is increased by $ 360 -LRB- 30x12 = 360 -RRB- . It cost you $ 160 to get your $ 200 work done for you . It is the same situation with auto insurance and accident claims . Be careful , and contact your agent , or other homeowners , and get an idea of what the rate increases are . You may even find that they have a `` forgiveness '' type of clause where it wo n't raise the rate . Hope that helps ! Thanks for asking !
The traditional way to compare home policies is to take the declarations page to another agent and ask for a comparison . You might want to do that with several agents . There are some websites that purport to compare coverages and prices . The issue isnt which company has the lowest premium but which policy provides the coverage that you require . If you paid less and the company failed to cover a loss you would have made quite a poor investment . It is better to know what coverages are available and get advice on which are appropriate . I live in an arid part of the USA . However , one of the largest floods in history took place right here . I might want flood insurance even if I am miles from a stream . This and other coverages might come to bear and evaluating the risk is what your agent can help you do . If you have a policy and in twenty years pay $ 200 more than some other company , if you have the right coverages because an agent went over the policy carefully with you , you are the winner , not the loser . Good coverage means a good nights sleep !
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
An employer can not discriminate against an employee based upon their age -LRB- among a multitude of other factors -RRB- . However , that does not necessarily mean that an older employee who compares what they are contributing towards their employer based health insurance with a younger co-worker of the same coverage level will find themselves paying the same amount . This may initially be perceived by the older employee as though they are being discriminated against but this is almost certainly not the case . If your employer 's group health insurance rates are age based rates then there is a different rate for each year of age for a covered employee . The community rating requirements of ObamaCare have pushed many health insurance carriers towards this age rated basis though some health insurance carriers still develop a `` composite '' rate for a group after quoting them on an age rated basis -LRB- composite rates are one rate for every employee with Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Employee + Child -LRB- ren -RRB- or Family coverage regardless of the employee 's age -RRB- . This is how things work under community rating . First of all , there can be no more than a 3 to 1 ratio between the rates for the youngest and oldest employees in the group . To keep things simple let 's say the monthly rate for a 25 year old is $ 200 per month then the monthly rate for a 60 year old would be $ 600 per month . Then let 's say that your employer pays 50 % of the employee only rate which leaves the other 50 % for the employee to pay . Under this scenario the 25 year old 's cost would be $ 100 per month -LRB- $ 200 x 50 % -RRB- and the 60 year old 's share would be $ 300 per month -LRB- $ 600 x 50 % -RRB- . Even though the dollar amount paid by each employee differs significantly the employer is treating them the same in that the employer is contributing the same percentage amount towards each employee 's coverage . Therefore , there is no discrimination . This is one of the effects of ObamaCare that is increasingly being seen by employees as their old health insurance plans and rate structures are being replaced by ObamaCare compliant plans and the new community rating method .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
It is not the insurance company that will determine if you can get a policy under $ 200 . It is your age , health , the type of policy you get , and the face amount of the policy . Visit one of the websites on this site that offers `` instant quotes '' , and input some different face amounts and policy types to see if you can find one with a premium that low . Then call that website to confirm if you qualify for it . Sometimes we have even lower priced options that are too hard to plug into a quote engine . If you get the right agent , it will always be to your advantage to talk to them and let them shop for you .
If you are just purchasing renters insurance in order to satisfy the apartment complex 's requirements , you should expect to pay under $ 200 per year . If you are looking for added protection for your belongings , jewelry , and increased liability protection it should still be under $ 400 . Renters insurance tends to be very inexpensive because you are not insuring the building .
Home and contents insurance , on average , is approximately $ 200 - $ 1000 per year , depending on how much coverage you have . For example , a home with the dwelling insured for $ 90,000 will cost far less than a home with the dwelling insured for $ 500,000 . There are many other underwriting variables that also must be considered .
Good Question depends on your state . But lets say a husband and wife 25-30 years old non smoker with a basic plan would normally cost about $ 150-200 a month . Can be more or less depends also on your health situation and your weight . good luck you should contact a local insurance broker in your area to give you rates .
On Employer sponsored group plans the minimum cost is 50 % of the group rate of the employees , which is usually the median rate of the employees added together . But , the employer can elect to pay more than 50 % , just no less of the employees premiums . Ex . you have 5 employees that have an underwritten group rate of $ 200 per month per employee , or $ 2,400 per year x 5 employees = $ 12,000 x 50 % , which is $ 6,000 per year . But , this does not include coverage for dependents or the tax implications . That is just the bottom line dollar cost , before any adjustments , and does not take into account the type of insurance coverage selected . There are several ways to get employee coverage , this example of a group plan is just the most common .
Great question ! The damage should be covered , but if it costs less to fix it than your deductible is , you may be better off not filing a claim . For example , let 's say the damage to repair your window is $ 200 . Your deductible is $ 500 . Your insurance is only going to pay anything over the $ 500 mark , so you will end up paying for the window regardless . It may not make sense to file a claim , pay for the window yourself , and then watch your rate go up . If you have renters insurance , and the car was in your apartment parking lot , there may be coverage there , depending upon the terms of your renters insurance . If you did not file a police report , I 'd recommend that you do , it will help you if you ever need documentation of damage and help collect on your claim . If you need help , feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
A standard renters policy will offer minimal coverage for stolen cash , if any . You may have zero coverage or as much as $ 200 - $ 300 depending on the insurance company and policy . It would be surprising if you had more coverage than that without specifically requesting a higher limit via an endorsement to your policy . Read your policy coverage forms under the insured property definitions to see what you have specifically .
On average , Auto insurance in Ohio is near the lowest in the nation . Ohio averages $ 648 for auto insurance for 6 months , which is nearly $ 200 less than the national average . -LRB- WEBSITELINK -RRB- There are a number of reasons , however , that YOUR rates may be higher . The obvious factors of driving record , type of car , your age and gender , and where you liveplay a role . However , some other factors are credit score , length of time with a previous insurer , and even education/occupation can help determine which risk category you fall into . Another factor to consider is the amount of coverage you are receiving for the premium you are paying . The more coverage you have , the higher your payment will be . However , you should remember that minimum coverage is just that : MINIMUM . It likely would n't be enough to pay if you were sued for causing a serious accident .
The answer is ... it depends . There are 11 standardized Medigap plans ; each plan provides different coverage resulting in different premium -LRB- cost -RRB- amounts . Also , most Medigap carriers use an `` attained age '' rating -LRB- pricing -RRB- methodology , so the older you are , the higher the premium . For the same plan and age , most carriers as well have a higher premium for a male than a female , and a higher premium for a smoker than a non-smoker . Where you live -LRB- state and zip code -RRB- may also affect the premium . Carriers also charge different premiums for the exact same plan . The average cost of a Medigap plan for all individuals over 65 is approximately $ 200 per month ; it may cost less or more depending upon the factors outlined . Your best bet is to find a reputable senior market insurance agent to discuss your objectives and available options .
-- > Normal 0 Before college students consider purchasing renters insurance , which I would refer to as tenant-homeowners insurance , I suggest they make the effort to find out if they are already afforded coverage by their familys homeowners or tenant-homeowners insurance . Students who maintain their primary residence as their familys home should be considered insureds under their parents policy . As an insured , their personal property should be covered anywhere in the world and in particular , at a temporary residence . In many cases , the coverage afforded by the familys policy will better than coverage they could buy on their own . Thats the first place I would check and I would get the response confirmed in writing . There may be limitations and deductibles to consider but in most cases the basic coverage should be adequate to cover most situations . Personal liability coverage should be available as well . For students who are no longer residents of their parents household -LRB- emancipated -RRB- or for parents who fear the impact of claims on their coverage , a separate policy could be considered . Insurers may be more reluctant to cover students on their own while at school but coverage should be available . A good place to start may be the parents insurer or agent . Basic policies with a $ 10,000-15 ,000 personal property limit should cost $ 200-300 a year . Coverage will be limited to specifically named perils , deductibles will apply and property will be covered for its actual cash value -LRB- not the cost to replace an old item with a new one -RRB- . If replacement cost coverage is available , I suggest you consider adding it .
There is no set answer to this question as it will depend upon the size of the employer group and the funding mechanism the employer group uses . After January 1 , 2014 for employer groups with less than 50 employees who are fully insured in many cases the answer will largely depend upon the age of the employee as many insurance carriers have gone to an age banded rating approach -LRB- for example , the employee only rate for a 25 year old will be different than the employee only rate for a 55 year old -RRB- . The rates will also vary significantly depending upon the state where the employer is domiciled -LRB- headquartered -RRB- . And rates will vary depending upon the level of benefits in a given employer 's health plan design . There are also other factors that can effect what a specific group 's employee rate will be . In the Tennessee , Mississippi and Arkansas region in early 2014 employee only rates for group health insurance can range from $ 200 to $ 500 or more per month when you take into account the variables I have listed in the previous paragraph . If you are an employer looking for a definitive answer to this question for your workforce you need to seek out the services of an experienced , qualified health insurance broker who can obtain quotes from a range of health insurance carriers covering a variety of health plan designs . I would be honored to offer my 30 years of industry experience to assist in answering this question for your company .
The average cost of life insurance in Oregon depends on many factors . One big factor is age . A $ 250,000 twenty year Term policy for a 30 year old male at the best health class averages about $ 200 per year . At age 50 , the average rate for that same policy is approximately $ 600 per year IF he still has excellent health . The length of the term is also a big factor . Shorter terms cost less , but as can be seen in the example above . locking in the premium for as long as possible is often a good idea . That is partly because health also greatly affects life insurance rates , and health is more apt to slip away as people age . To find the average life insurance cost in the state of Oregon for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes and test out some different face amounts and term lengths . Then give that agency a call so that you can be sure all your health details are taken into consideration . That will help you get a fair price .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Will Renters Insurance Cover Fire ?
Under most circumstances yes , renters insurance will provide coverage for a fire . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
I previously posted this piece in response to a renter insurance question . I am sharing it here , hoping that it might be of value in answer to this inquiry . Mr. Pipes provides a good summary before me and concludes with an important question . I am adding this message with a personal example of the value of this coverage . Renters insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and several other common loss circumstances . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
Although I have answered similar questions of this nature previously , it is such an important coverage that I will repeat it . While I obviously do not know your particular situation and whether or not your landlord requires you to maintain renters insurance , I can tell you the following that might help you see the value of some of the coverages provided . Renters ' insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and others . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . No one was hurt but the apartment became uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy , they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions and they received reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . Additionally , the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... but the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation . That alone would have cost them heavy legal fees . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time .
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
Renter 's Insurance does n't just insure your personal property . It comes with Liability Insurance as well . This is what the landlord is interested in . I will give you an example . Let 's say you had a candle burning and it caught the building on fire . If the building burns down , the landlord will collect from his insurance company . That insurance company then has a right to come after you since you caused the fire . Knowing that most people who live in apartments do n't have sizable net worth 's they assume they wo n't be able to get you to pay them for the damage to the building and for loss to other tenants in the building . So , the landlord 's insurance company probably gives him a discount for requiring tenants to have Renter 's Insurance . Your Renter 's Insurance will pay for certain types of damage that are caused accidentally by you , such as fire and explosion under your liability coverage . This is a great way to protect your assets and Renter 's Insurance is very Inexpensive . If I can help shoot me an email at dbeukel1@amfam.com .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
Renters ' insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and others . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . No one was hurt but the apartment became uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy , they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions and they received reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . Additionally , the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... but the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time
I have answered this question previously but it is such an important coverage that I will repeat it . Renters ' insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and others . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . No one was hurt but the apartment became uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy , they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions and they received reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . Additionally , the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... but the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Home insurance covers fires with most carriers and the type of policy you have . Also it matters on how the fire was started lightning that started the forest on fire by your home or if the neighbor child lit fireworks and it caught the field on fire and your hope . Two different examples of fires one the home should be covered by your insurance the other could be paid by the person that started the other fire . I highly recommend you contact your agent and make sure you are properly covered and also make sure you home is clear of debris and brush to make sure that if a fire is heading your direction that you have a clean perimeter around the home . There are things that you can spray on your home that will prevent it from burning if you know a forest fire is on it 's wayAlso
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
Always . And the landlord should request evidence of the existence of the renters insurance . Reason number one : Under the personal liability coverage of a renters policy the carrier agrees to pay the sums the insured is legally liable for as a result of bodily injury or property damage . What type of occurrencescould be involved ? A guest in the renter 's apartment slips on a wet bathroom floor , falls , and is injured . This is bodily injury . The tenant leaves a pan of oil on the stove unattended and a fire results damaging the building . This is property damage . Reason number two : Unless legally liable , the landlord is not responsible for the tenant 's business or personal property -LRB- for things like fire , theft , mysterious disappearance , etc -RRB- The tenant should cover their own property with insurance like a renters policy .
Both Michael and Dan have provided useful information here . I would like to add a personal circumstance that I have often shared , in hopes that it will increase awareness of the importance of this coverage . As both Gentleman have indicated , a landlord can require that the renter 's policy be a term within a lease . Absent a State law that would preclude inclusion of such a clause , it can be a requirement . I saw the value of this important insurance coverage first-hand , when my two Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere , while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court , as a frivolous allegation , the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence claim , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
Mr. Erickson has provided useful information here . I would like to add a personal circumstance that I have often shared , in hopes that it will increase awareness of the importance of this coverage . As Mr. Erickson has indicated , a landlord can require that the renter 's policy be a requirement within a lease . Absent a State law that would preclude inclusion of such a clause , it can be a requirement . I saw the value of this important insurance coverage first-hand , when my two Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere , while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court , as a frivolous allegation , the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence claim , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Is Military Retirement A Qualified Plan ?
No , military retirement is not a qualified plan . It does not offer a vesting schedule for early retirees , it does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , and the money received through their retirement plan is considered wages and not pension monies . Therefore , the retirement plan offered by the military is non-qualified .
No , the retirement plan offered by the military is not qualified . Public sector pension plans are not covered by ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- , and in order for a retirement plan to be qualified , it must meet the regulations set forth by ERISA . Therefore , the military 's retirement plan offered through the federal government is nonqualified .
No , military retirement is not a qualified plan . It does not offer a vesting schedule for early retirees , it does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , and the money received through their retirement plan is considered wages and not pension monies . Therefore , the retirement plan offered by the military is non-qualified .
No , the Military 's retirement plan is not a qualified plan ; it is a public sector retirement plan that is not covered by ERISA . Military retirement does not offer a vesting schedule and does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , which provides security for failed pension plans .
USAA was formed by military officers for military officers and enlisted personnel . Anyone who is currently in the military , or retired with an honorable discharge can join . There are ways to join if you are n't or were n't in the military . These are : One of your parents was in the military and has purchased an auto or home policy ; You are a widow/widower or former -LRB- unremarried -RRB- spouse of a member who had purchased auto or home insurance ; Attending one of the service academies or in advanced ROTC at a college/university . I 'm not sure how many generations a membership can be passed down . I have a membership through my father-in-law who served in the Navy during WWII , and my son has a membership through me and my wife . I think a membership can only be passed down two generations , but I do n't know that for sure . It 's a great organization . If you are eligible , I strongly recommend you join . They have lots of great benefits besides insurance .
A military pension is a non-qualified retirement plan . It is provided in the public sector , does not offer a vesting schedule for early retirees , does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , and is not under ERISA . The FAS US Military annuity payment -LRB- distribution -RRB- from form 1099 is non-qualified .
The following people are eligible to apply for USAA Auto insurance : Active , retired and honorably separated officers and enlisted personnel of the U.S. military . Officer candidates in commissioning programs -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . Adult children whose eligible parents have or had a USAA auto or property insurance product . Widows and widowers of USAA members who have or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy . If you or your spouse served in the military , you will need to provide the following information for that person : Date of birth Social Security number USAA number Military enlistment , commissioning , retirement or separation date
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
Yes the military offers life insurance through -LRB- USAA -RRB- which is a good place to start being they specialize in the military . There are other companies that deal with military personnel also such as Peterson International they deal with high risk clients such as military , football players . construction workers etc. . John Cole Virtual Financial Group Recruiter / Manager Living Benefits .
That is a great question ! Regular life insurance companies will not insure anyone that is in the military , or in an area where military action is likely . Insurance companies are all about the risk of loss , and being in the military greatly increases that risk . As a result , the federal Government offers life insurance for the members of the military , so that their families can be protected also . That is what Servicemen Group Life is . I hope that helps . Thanks for asking !
Their recent T.V. commercials are pretty good , with the people of all ages , who state that they have a USAA policy through various military service and family connections . The first level of those who are eligible for their policies are active , retired and/or enlisted U.S. military personnel . Also eligible are Officer Candidate personnel , such as ROTC and other military service candidate programs . Additionally , the adult -LRB- 18 + age -RRB- children of parents who either had or currently have a USAA auto or home product and widows or widowers of former USAA auto and home policyholders are eligible .
The Military does offer three retirement plans . The one that you would receive is based on your DIEMS -LRB- Date of Entry Into Military Service -RRB- . They are called Final Pay , High-3 , and REDUX . Benefits are calculated based on your number of years in service , the year you will retire , basic monthly pay received , a multiplier , and cost of living factor .
Members of the National Guard have access to inexpensive health insurance through the military 's Tricare system that combines the health resources of the military with networks of civilian health care professionals , institutions , pharmacies and suppliers to provide affordable access to high-quality health care services around the world . While it can be a major money-saving benefit for military families , it 's a very complex system with countless terms and conditions . If you are eligible , you should take time to understand their eligibility and enroll in the plan that best meets your needs .
Some life insurance does cover active military but some does not . Many companies wo n't issue a policy to you if you are active duty . Look for companies life the Armed Forces Benefit Association/5-Star Life which specialize in military families . Also the United States Automobile Association/USAA works mainly with military families .
Active military and National Guard are covered by TRICARE , a health care program for service members and their families around the world . TRICARE is the major part of the Military Health System , a system that utilizes combined resources of military hospitals and clinics with civilian health care networks , as well as a combination of different coverage options depending on where the person is currently stationed . TRICARE coverage does meet the requirements for having minimum essential benefits as called for under the Affordable Care Act .
Im not sure if there is any free coverage . If there is it is a small amount . But all members of the military are eligible for subsidized coverage through the Department of Veterans Affairs . The program is called SGLI -LRB- Service-members Group Life Insurance -RRB- . It is super cheap and all members of the military should take advantage of it . It is a flat rate regardless of age/tobacco use/health . $ 400k costs $ 27/m When you retire you can convert it to the veterans group life plan . WEBSITELINK
To get USAA insurance , you must be a member of USAA . To be eligible to be a member of USAA , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You are an officer or enlisted personnel in the US military , or are retired or honorably separated from the US military . 2 -RRB- You are an officer candidate in a commissioning program -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You are an adult child whose parent has or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy , . 4 -RRB- You are a widow or widower of a USAA member who had a USAA auto or property insurance policy .
In the context of health insurance , qualifying events are certain life events that meet criteria established by the IRS and now , also Health and Human Services , that would allow an individual to enroll in individual health insurance outside of the normal annual open enrollment period established under the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . Common examples of qualifying events are ; 1 -RRB- Loss of health insurance coverage through your employer 2 -RRB- Expiration of your health insurance coverage through a former employer under the Federal COBRA regulations or state continuation of coverage provisions 3 -RRB- Loss of coverage under a government sponsored plan , including Medicaid or CHIP 4 -RRB- Loss of Minimum Essential Coverage -LRB- e.g. - state high risk pool , student health plan -RRB- 5 -RRB- Birth or adoption of a child or establishing foster care or legal guardianship of a child 6 -RRB- Marriage 7 -RRB- No longer an eligible dependent -LRB- e.g. - child turning age 26 -RRB- 8 -RRB- Divorce from a policyholder 9 -RRB- Termination of a pre-Affordable Care Act individual plan during 2014 10 -RRB- Moving to a new area that offers different plan options or outside of an HMO service area 11 -RRB- Employer bankruptcy resulting in loss of coverage for retirees 12 -RRB- Return from active military service 13 -RRB- Release from incarceration 14 -RRB- Unintentional error or enrollment/disenrollment in a health insurance marketplace plan is unintentional or erroneous 15 -RRB- Newly eligible/ineligible for exchange subsidies or premium tax credit or cost-sharing reductions 16 -RRB- A material violation committed by the health plan You should operate under the assumption that you have 60-days after such a `` Qualifying Life Event '' to complete your application for new health insurance coverage .
Government health insurance begins when you go to work for a government agency including the military . If you are a civilian employ of the government , you may also qualify for government provided health insurance . If you meet poverty guidelines you may qualify for Medicaid or SCHIP . If you are 65 or older you may qualify for Medicare .
For a person in the individual health insurance market after January 1 , 2014 you can switch your health insurance in a limited number of circumstances under the requirements of the Affordabel Care Act . 1 -RRB- During the open enrollment period , which ended on March 31st , 2014 . The next open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 for an effective date of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . 2 -RRB- Having a change of life status event . There are several things that can occur in your work or personal life that would allow you to enroll or change carriers outside of the newly established open enrollment periods . Some examples are ; - Loss of employer based coverage due to termination of employment or reduction in hours . - COBRA expiration : your COBRA or state continuation of coverage period expires - Loss of a Government Sponsored Plan - loss of eligibility for Medicaid , CHIP , Medicare , TRICARE , Veterans programs , Peace Corps programs - Loss of Minimum Essential Coverage - loss of an existing policy with Minimum Essential Benefits such as ; a Student Health Insurance plan or State High Risk Pool coverage - Birth , Adoption , Foster Care or Legal Guardianship - Marriage - No longer being an eligible dependent ; loss of employer sponsored or individual coverage because you are no longer eligible as a dependent . Generally this would mean you have turned age 26 . - Divorce from a policyholder - Termination of a pre-ACA individual plan during 2014 -LRB- this does not apply to short term major medical insurance plans -RRB- - Moving : you move out of state , or to a new area that offers different plan options or is outside of an HMO plan 's service area - Returning from active military service - Being released from jail - Newly eligible or ineligible for exchange subsidies or premium tax credit or cost-sharing reductions . This would mean a change in income levels have either now qualified you for subsidies you did not previously qualify for or have disqualified you for subsidies that you previously qualified for . - A material violation by the health plan : the health plan you enrolled in violates a material provision of its contract This pretty well covers the situations in which an individual can switch their health insurance under the conditions of the Affordable Care Act .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Can I Make Sure That I Do n't Run Out Of Money In Retirement ?
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
That is the million dollar question for sure ! You are definitely not the only one asking that question , or losing sleep worrying about it , I promise you . There are a few ways that you may want to consider . The easiest is to invest in some annuity products , so that you can receive an income for your entire life . Wise timing for taking your Social Security benefits can help also - the later you take them , the higher the benefit amount . Investing in an IRA , like a Roth , can also help provide a source of income - Roth 's are good , because you are n't required to start withdrawals from them , so you can let them grow for as long as you can before tapping into them . Start investing and saving early ; reduce whatever debt that you will be heading into retirement with ; and have a solid idea of what retirement looks like to you , so you know how much you will need to have put away to make that retirement vision a reality . I hope that helps , please feel free to contact me if you need more help , okay ? Thanks for asking !
It is never to late to plan for retirement . The earlier you start , the easier it is to make sure you have the money to maintain the lifestyle you want and desire . If you do no planing or do not save enough , you might get what I like to refer to as the `` blue vest '' retirement . Hence you see retired people working at Walmart as greeters as well as other market places . There are many options these days to make sure you will have the money , not run out of money you need for retirement . Take the first step now , make a call to your local adviser or at least due some research making sure who you are talking to or the material you are reading is credible .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
I love this question ! The answer is found all over the internet . Yes , the same internet that you used to buy insurance . Look at the reviews on Yelp and others to see what kind of feedback -LRB- complaints -RRB- people are posting . The moment you begin to choose your insurance based solely on the price , you 'll begin to run into problems . Claims not handled to your satisfaction and the inability to get anyone on this continent to talk to you about it . You may save a few bucks when you purchase your insurance but you 'll lose in the long run . A good agent does something a website can never do ... care . If you have a problem with the way my company handles a claim you can walk right into my office and talk with me , and I 'll listen and do whatever I can to make you happy . I 'm accountable for the services that I provide . Flo or the Gecko will try to sell you on the idea that all insurance is the same and the price is the only thing that matters . Nothing could be further from the truth . Will Flo tell you that you 're grossly underinsured and , god forbid , you get sued , you could be paying for the rest of your life ? Nope . But a good agent will , and it probably would n't cost that much more . The internet has n't made the insurance agent obsolete . On the contrary , it proves why you need a good one . Insurance is n't a simple point and click product . There are many different aspects that fit together to make it work for you , and it 's different for everyone . I 've never had a client tell me I 'm overcharging them after we 've rebuilt their home . Will the lizard show up at your home at 2am when your house is still burning ? I have , it 's what I owe my clients . There are bad agents out there , I 'll admit . I 've met quite a few . However , most good agents take their responsibility seriously and they truly care about their clients . So , in summary , agents are necessary only if you want someone who cares about covering your family correctly .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
Your comment made me laugh ! And yes , I can answer your great question like a five year old , I 'm a master of simple ! An annuity is a way of putting money aside now to spend later . You get them through insurance companies . Once you put the money in it , you should n't touch it . It sits for many years growing and waiting for you . Once you get old and need it , you tell it you are ready to get paid . It will then start paying you every month until you a. -RRB- use it up b. -RRB- pass away or c. -RRB- your surviving spouse passes away -LRB- you pick one when you get it -RRB- . They are a way of making sure you have money during your retirement . They are not a good idea for everybody - -LRB- like riding a bike without training wheels for the first ever bike ride -RRB- some people have trouble with their bills , and setting aside lots of bill money could be a bad thing , so they have to do what is called a ` suitability study ' first . It will help figure out if it is a good thing . If the person you talk to does n't do one , they are bad - run away ! And some of them are filled with hiding fees and costs , that eat away like bad bugs at your money while it is away , so you have to be careful and ask ` pacifically what the costs are in total for the annuity . If it does n't cost too much , it is a good thing . There are lots of types , so ask about all of them and take notes before you even think of giving them your money , k ? I hope that helps , please realize that is greatly simplified . But the bottom line is that the right annuity can be a great part of your retirement plan . Please feel free to contact me for more details , or to answer any lingering questions , okay ? Thank you for the ` funnest ' question I have ever gotten to answer here !
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
As I am sure you have found out , insurable interest is the key principle here . But insurable interest ranges far and wide . Let me share with you some of the more interesting cases I have come across . For sure , spouses can take out a policy on one another . They are codependent . I have also seen married men and women take out policies on their lovers . They called that person a domestic partner . This was in addition to having a policy on their marital partner ! Policies on kids are common . Its tough to think about kids dying , but generations ago it was commonplace to buy a burial policy on a new child . But there is another reason to do so : get a policy on a child so that he or she grows into adulthood already covered . What if unfortunately he has a tough time getting coverage later on , due to a medical condition or other higher risk factor ? Maybe he becomes a mountain climber , or a scuba diver , or has a job which requires travel to Third World countries . He will be really glad you had the foresight to get him a life policy when you did . I have seen children take out policies on parents . One client dedicated herself to making sure her retired mother lived in style . She bought her a house , paid her monthly expenses , treated her to a new car , and really paid her back for all that generosity Mom had shown her growing up . Of course , the daughter sacrificed her own retirement money to do so . So I was able to get her life policy on mom to reimburse her . Then you have policies taken out by businesses on partners and key people . Plus you have charities insuring donors to make sure those contributions keep on coming .
Its very easy . Call up your life insurance carrier and ask them to walk you through the process . Of course , you should cover a few bases first to make sure that : Its the right decision , and Youre doing it the right way . How do you know its the right decision ? You know it is the right decision if you are absolutely , positively sure your beneficiary can do with less money . This is because the amount of the outstanding loan - plus interest - are deducted from the death benefit . If you take out a significant amount of money , that might short-change your beneficiaries . Then the whole purpose of the product would be defeated . To avoid this problem , reconsider any other sources of a loan . If you go ahead with the loan , reconsider other sources of cash for your beneficiaries to make up the difference . Now : are you doing it the right way ? Have the insurance company run an illustration showing the impact on your policy of taking out cash . Its not just a question of reducing the death benefit . It might also affect the guarantee period of your premium . Lets suppose you bought the policy intending to guarantee the coverage to 100 . Now suppose that taking out the loan would shorten the guarantee to age 85 . Not what you wanted , right ? You need to know this so you can design a strategy for paying back the cash . You might want to pay it back sooner than you had intended , so as to restore the original value of the of the product . These are some of the important bases to cover when you think about taking money out of your life insurance policy .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Your insurance is only as good as your agent . An Agent can provide you personal service as most online carriers you can not get this type of service . In many cases you can get a better rate from an agent because they listen to you and what our needs and make sure you are properly covered . I have thousands of time Beat the online rate with the same carrier even . It really comes down to personal preference . Some say they like the online because it is 24/7 That is ok also But our clients We personally answer the phone 24/7 I can count on 1 hand how many times a client has ever had to leave a voicemail . If your looking for just numbers and no service then by all means online is the way to go just make sure that you are properly covered and also make sure that they can even sell insurance in your state . I ca n't begin to count how many people I know that have purchased online because a of a banner ad they clicked or got in their email and purchased coverage then found out later after a claim that that carrier is not allowed to even sell in our state hence no coverage and out of the money they spent on a policy . Or worse yet bought a policy online and it was not even a real company now days the scammers are out there buyer beware .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is The Lowest Cost Auto Insurance ?
The lowest cost auto insurance will depend on where you live , the car you drive , your driving record and the coverage you want . Shopping for the lowest rate is handled best by an experienced broker . You can quickly compare the best prices online , apply for coverage quickly and utilize low down-payment options . You want great coverage at the lowest rates and it certainly is possible .
Home insurance can be obtained numerous property and casualty insurance companies . If you currently have auto insurance , you may start with that company as having both auto and homeowners policies with the same company can provide discounts that reduce your overall cost . You can also get quotes online from companies such as State Farm , Farmer 's , Liberty Mutual , and Allstate . While these companies will provide quotes for their own companies , getting a quote from an insurance broker or AAA insurance can provide quotes from several different companies and may provide your best opportunity to find the lowest cost . Be sure to speak to an experienced insurance agent to ensure you have proper coverage . Just because once company has the lowest price does n't make it your best option . Be sure understand deductibles and riders such as earthquake insurance .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Shop , shop around . Shop online and over the phone to get the lowest rates possible . Buying auto insurance online is becoming more popular because of the convenience and flexibility it offers . Also calling auto insurance agencies are a great way as well ; some agents will shop multiple companies over the phone and give you the lowest price and you can purchase right on the spot . There are many service providers available online which makes it easy to get your automobile insured without even moving out of your home . The online agency provides all the relevant information necessary for the process and also provides an instant comparison of insurance rates from various service providers at a glance . You can save time and effort that you would have to otherwise spend on doing the research yourself or going out . Online or over the phone is a great way to save and find the cheapest auto insurance quote .
Great question ! The things to look for are pretty much the same things that you want in your health insurance - the lowest cost , for the most coverage , with the lowest deductible . Everyone understands lowest cost , for the coverage , you want to look for the more things that the policy will pay for , the better . The deductible is the amount that you have to pay out of your pocket before the insurance money kicks in , so the look for the lowest deductible , highest coverage that you can afford . If you need more detail , feel free to contact me , I 'm glad to help . Thanks for asking !
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
The lowest auto insurance rates are easily found when you work with an experienced broker and their website . Why ? It 's important to check multiple companies , and receive unbiased advice from someone with at least 20 years in the business . Whether you have a great driving record or are considered a high-risk , you 'll save money . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier Auto Insurance Broker for last 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
How much is for car insurance ? Hmmm . What is this person attempting to ask ? How many people like auto insurance ? No , I think they mean something else . How much does it cost ? Yes , that 's probably it . Rates vary , depending on your age , location , driving record and vehicle . As experienced brokers , we 're always happy to shop for the best rates and show you the lowest prices . LIVE -LRB- 2014/2015 -RRB- Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier US car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites where consumers find the lowest available rates .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
Great question ! The thought process behind buying homeowners insurance is the same that you would use for buying your auto or health insurances . You want to look for lowest cost , highest coverage , and lowest deductible . The amount of deductible will influence the cost , and is the amount that you will have to put out before the insurance starts to pay . You want one that is high enough to lower the price , but low enough that you can cover without too much hardship . You also want a policy that covers as many scenarios and dollar amounts as possible . Again , there will have to be a balance between affordability and payout , so I 'd strongly advise that you find a local agent who can walk with you through the process . If you would like more help , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Renters Insurance premium is different in all areas ; in order to obtain a quote , it is best to input the address and coverage desired and you 'll be able to obtain an instantaneous quotation . In order to obtain the lowest possible premium , you would need to request the lowest Personal Property coverage necessary , the lowest available Personal Liability limit and the highest available deductible ; this is the recipe for the lowest premium . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
Auto insurance will cover a cracked windshield if you have comprehensive coverage on your car policy . Typically , there is no deductible to meet -LRB- if you elected that option -RRB- and the replacement or repair will be no cost to you . Also , most glass and windshield replacement companies can come to your residence or place of business at no additional cost . Safelite AutoGlass is one of the largest providers of this type of work and most carriers honor their work . It is possible you have a deductible on your comprehensive vehicle benefits . For example , if your deductible is $ 50 and the cost of replacement is $ 350 , $ 50 is your only out-of-pocket-cost . Also , your existing car insurance premium is generally not impacted by filing a comprehensive claim . Answer provided by Edward Harris , owner of Carinsurancezoom.org , the leading trusted auto insurance website for consumers that shop for the lowest rates . All quotes are provided instantly and without obligation . Harris has more than 34 years in the business as a leading US broker .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Great question ! There are so many choices out there to choose from , and it is wise to shop around , especially for insurance . The internet can be a useful tool , and many people are relying upon it more and more to help find the option they are looking for . Unfortunately , most advertised quotes are `` best case '' scenarios , and often are not what you will end up paying . The personal variables of what you need makes it difficult for a machine to figure out what you will really pay . Find an independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single company -RRB- to compare prices . Call your existing agent , and see if they will provide a discount for adding coverages -LRB- most will , and the discounts can be substantial -RRB- . Have an idea what you have to spend , and talk it over before you sign anything . Look for best coverage at the lowest cost , and with the lowest deductible that you can afford . If you need help , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Excellent question ! You essentially have 3 main variations on the theme when purchasing ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance ; 1 -RRB- Conventional plan designs with office visit & prescription copays and lower deductibles -LRB- pretty pricey these days -RRB- 2 -RRB- High deductible health insurance plans designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- or a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- - becoming more common . 3 -RRB- Plans that fall in between , here you may see a plan with office visit copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , plans with prescription copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , or plans with more moderate deductible levels with all services subject to the plan 's deductible and co-insurance requirements but that also do n't meet the IRS requirements for being an HSA eligible plan . Simple , right ? First , determine if the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use are in-network providers for the plan you are interested in . Second , review you health and your history of health care consumption . Your needs and usage at 27 will probably be much different than when you are 47 . Try to pick a plan that you believe will meet your needs in the coming year at the best value . Determine if the plan you are interested in allows for direct access to specialists or whether it requires you to be referred out by your primary care physician first . Neither approach is bad but you should understand how you are supposed to access care in order to maximize your benefits and minimize your costs . Ask what your coverage is when you are outside of your immediate area . Increasingly you may find that you only have emergency care outside of a plan 's `` service area '' or perhaps no coverage at all . Do you have special needs ? A chronic illness or injury that requires ongoing treatment or expensive prescription medication requires extra homework . For example , some health plan 's pharmacy benefits cover HIV/AIDS medications at the lowest level -LRB- to them , highest for you -RRB- possible . Finally , compare monthly premiums . The lowest monthly cost , while always attractive , many not really be the lowest annual cost for you once you factor in some or all of the issues I have pointed out above . It may be worth another $ 50 a month in premiums to have a prescription copay instead of a deductible of up to $ 6300 to meet before your expensive medication is covered .
There are several carriers who would offer an 18 year old in Minnesota car insurance coverage . What 's probably important to you is who will give you the best coverage at the lowest price . To get this , you should seek out the help of an agent who is licensed to sell auto insurance in your state who can show you various auto insurance quotes .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Car insurance for a college student is often very cheap , depending upon where you live and the type of vehicle you are insuring . Your age , the vehicle , your driving record , and the liability limits and deductibles will all help determine the rate . Also ... a good student discount can potentially reduce premiums and save hundreds of dollars . Other available discounts can also save money , including a reduction if you are more than 300-500 miles from home . How do you get the lowest auto insurance rates for college students ? Let an experienced broker search and compare multiple companies and you 'll save money , time and an immense amount of frustration ! LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several of the nation 's top-rated car insurance websites that offer the lowest prices for consumers . Online quotes in about a minute .
Cheap car insurance for 18 year-olds may be available through selected carriers . Finding the lowest rate is best accomplished when you work with an experienced broker . There is no cost or obligation , and the potential savings can be substantial . Although the least expensive rate is not always the best option , the combination of low rates and great coverage is what brokers -LRB- experienced ones -RRB- find the best . If your policy will be taken out by an adult , they should be consulted . As you get older , your cost will reduce , and save you quite a bit of money . But most importantly , having the most appropriate deductibles and liability limits may save you much more ! LIVE answer provided by Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker with more than 33 years of experience and owner of several nationally top-rated websites that offer consumers the lowest available rates .
end question
start question
life-insurance
I 'm 50 with a term life policy that expires when I 'm 60 . Should I convert to whole life , and if so , when ?
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
Hahah ! I like Brandi Jo 's answer above best ! But the answer to your question , `` Should I convert to Whole Life and When ? '' depends on a number of things . Will you be retiring at 60 or are you retired now ? How much liquidity do you have now ? Will you have a need for insurance when you turn 60 ? So the answer to your question depends on your goals and needs for insurance . You should talk with an insurance adviser . Personally I think you should 've started with Whole Life , but that not being the case if you are going to convert your term policy you should do it immediately .
Yes . Yesterday . Call me . I can get you a policy that will give you cash in retirement tax free . Also increase your retirement income by at least 30 % . Whole Life policies allow you to spend everything else you 've saved for retirement and then give you protection against inflation and volatility .
That is an excellent question ! I think it is great that you are on top of your insurance situation . I 'd advise you to call your agent , and ask about the ability to convert your policy . Make sure that your policy will allow it ; and if so , how much coverage it would give you . Then look at whether that is enough coverage . If not , then you will want to think about adding some additional coverage , either in another term policy , or some additional whole life , depending upon your budget . I do not recommend by any stretch to renew it , as it will get very expensive very quickly . If you need help , please feel free to contact me , okay - I 'm happy to help . Thank you for asking !
If your current term policy has the option to `` convert '' to a permanent life insurance policy , the advantage of converting now is that you can get a lower premium than you could at age 60 . Either way , you should not have to re-qualify for coverage under your current policy conversion . Insurance companies often have limitations as to the type of policy you can convert to and you need to find out exactly what type of policy they would allow you to convert to and make sure it fits your needs . It is a good idea to check out other offerings from other insurance companies as well - you never know when a fresh start could get you a better `` fit '' for moving forward with permanent life insurance . Of course , you would have to qualify for a new policy with another company , but it costs you nothing to check it out .
The term `` convert '' usually means an internal replacement to a permanent policy . While many carriers do not offer a whole life policy , you will be able to convert into a universal policy with certain guarantees depending upon the conditions of your term contract . That said , your decision should be based on your need , financial situation and other factors . If conversion makes sense for you , I would do it sooner than later , especially if your current carrier allows conversion into any of their current permanent products . If not , and your health is acceptable , consider purchase of a permanent product from another company . This and other questions about conversion should be asked to your current agent and discussed fully with your proposed beneficiaries to make sure of the best decision on your part .
If you are sure that you will die prior to your age 60 , dont do anything . If you suspect you might live past age 60 you will need to ask yourself a few questions . Will you have needs that will last the balance of your life ? These would probably be money to cover final expenses and a cushion to offset any lost income that would result if you died and your spouse would have a reduction in benefit . If you have a permanent need , you need a permanent policy .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from InsuranceLibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is term life insurance better than permanent life insurance ? '' Well , did you hear the two words in there ? One is term and one is permanent . When I 'm looking at term insurance , I 'm looking at obligations . I 'm looking at liabilities that I may that are temporal that they are not forever . And so I 'm going to look at term insurance to cover those ideas , those indemnification needs , and if I have permanent needs them I 'm going have to look at different forms of life insurance that are permanent . It could be Par Whole Life . It could Current Assumption UL . It could be Indexed Universal Life . It could be Variable Life , depending upon what my propensity for risks are , but I 'm always looking , is this a temporary expense reimbursement ? Or is this a permanent need that will never go away ? It 's never not is term insurance better or worse than permanent ? It 's the issue of the need . Well , that 's our consumer question for the day . If you have any questions just submit them to www.InsuranceLibrary.com .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
That is a great question ! I have a great answer - it means that there is no more cost for your coverage , it is paid off ! There are a couple of ways that you have reached this great place . You might have purchased a policy that was structured to have higher premiums for a period of time , allowing the costs of the policy to be paid off more quickly than the traditional whole life policy would normally have . These policies are more expensive than the traditional whole life policy , but are perfect for someone who may be working , and not want to carry that monthly expense into retirement , yet still wants whole life coverage . For someone who wants to maximize retirement money , this may be a great financial decision . The other way that you might have gotten here is by converting an expiring term life policy . Often when a term policy reaches a point near its end date the option to convert your premiums paid over the life of the policy to payments on that company 's whole life policy that would most closely match your term policy in price . If you choose that option , then the company considers what you have paid on the term as the purchase price for a single payment on a whole life policy , and the face value is determined by that price . For example , I have a client whose $ 100,000 term policy allows him the option to convert it . If he chooses to do that , the premiums he would pay on the policy over the life of the term would purchase about $ 43,000 worth of whole life insurance that is paid up free and clear . He would have that coverage and not ever owe another penny on it . If you have any further questions , I hope you feel free to contact me and ask , I 'm happy to help . Thank you for asking your question !
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com today , and here 's our question : is converting my term life insurance policy to a permanent policy a good idea ? Well remember , most people buy their term insurance because they 're buying it for a time certain event 10 years , 15 years , 20 years . Sometimes life changes and all of the sudden liabilities and obligations that I thought were going to be terminal now become permanent . I want to make sure when I buy my term insurance contract that I have convertibility and that that convertibility allows me to go to a really good permanent portfolio , so all of the sudden if I need to change and I need to make a maneuver , I may have to convert my term to perm because my obligations and liabilities have changed . That 's why you need to look at a good term contract that has convertibility options and a good window to convert to a good quality permanent policy . Well , that 's our consumer quest ion for today . If you have any questions just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is buying term and investing the difference better than cash value life insurance ? '' Well , when I 'm looking at buying term and investing the difference , what am I investing it in ? And is that a risk area ? And if I 'm looking at permanent insurance , am I looking at guarantees and guaranteed returns ? Am I looking at using indexing ? Am I looking at risk-based insurance , like variable ? When I put those two together , I want to look at both of those plans and to see which one comes out the best . We have programs that we 've developed that will measure , is it better to buy term insurance and invest the difference in whatever product line you want to think of , whether it 's mutual funds or ETF 's . Or is it better to keep it inside a contract for the tax deferral and the possible tax-free income ? You can compare those things and always know which way to go with a simple program that will measure it for you . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
That is a great question ! It 's really one that you should ask your agent , because I 'm a little hazy on what you are wanting to do . You are n't going to be able to convert your life insurance policy into an annuity , so that part of your question is no , you wo n't convert it at all . As for the receiving of premiums , Companies pay premiums -LRB- or do n't -RRB- at their choosing . They determine the amount to be paid , if any , and usually at a set time during their fiscal year they make that payment . I believe NWML pays once a year , but I may be wrong , I 've never asked them -LRB- I have policies from them that my Dad bought way back when -RRB- I just appreciate seeing them on my yearly statement . Please contact your agent , and have them explain your policy a little better to you . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! I know that there are several companies out there that practice Christian values and standards of good stewardship , -LRB- mine included -RRB- and use those values and biblical lessons when teaching their clients . I 'm a little leery however , when companies profess to market specifically for one segment of the population , and here 's why . First and foremost is our commission to `` go forth and make disciples '' . If I 'm only working with `` saved Christians '' , how can I be fulfilling Christ 's command ? Secondly , I 'm always a little skeptical of the motives of companies that separate out folks to market to based on religion . What makes the money of one religion any different than another 's ? Or the needs of those people ? And are n't we asked as Christians to help everyone as we 'd like to be helped ? Those `` Christian '' companies that only serve the needs of other `` Christians '' then seem to me to be doing exactly opposite of what our Lord has asked us to do . I 'm sure that there are many good companies in your area that can assist you very capably , perhaps your Pastor or Priest can direct you to one in the Church you attend . Thanks for asking !
Hahah ! I like Brandi Jo 's answer above best ! But the answer to your question , `` Should I convert to Whole Life and When ? '' depends on a number of things . Will you be retiring at 60 or are you retired now ? How much liquidity do you have now ? Will you have a need for insurance when you turn 60 ? So the answer to your question depends on your goals and needs for insurance . You should talk with an insurance adviser . Personally I think you should 've started with Whole Life , but that not being the case if you are going to convert your term policy you should do it immediately .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
That is a great question ! You can find anything on the internet these days , and certainly life insurance is on there for the taking . I 'm not a big fan of buying it on the internet , but I do think it 's good to research and comparison shop on it . Here 's why I do n't recommend buying online : 1 . -RRB- If you apply on line , the price you are quoted is almost always the `` best price '' scenario . It may be quite different from the actual price the policy comes to you with , after the prescription , MIB and underwriting processes are completed . A live agent will have discussed this with you , and in most cases can give you an exact quote . 2 . -RRB- If there is an issue with your health , and you are declined more than once , this becomes a red flag for any other company that you will apply with . Again , a live agent can prevent this from happening by steering you toward an appropriate policy/company . 3 . -RRB- Maybe I 'm a little old fashioned , but the protection of my family still means a lot to me . I 'm not comfortable putting my information out there on the web , especially with the almost daily revelations of who 'd been hacked months ago that we 're just now being told about . Add to that the horrendous experiences with on-line customer service , and I 'm not counting on them to answer in an emergency . I want a live body answering my call . I hope that helps you , thank you for asking !
First I 'd like to say that your question , `` Do I need life insurance now that I 'm getting married '' is a mature question that indicates you genuinely care about your future wife and family and are an intelligent thinker ! Good on ya ! The answer to whether you need insurance or not really relies on your financial strength and goals . If you have a few million dollars in liquid assets you probably do n't NEED insurance ... but you may still WANT to have Whole Life , Cash Value life insurance . The wealthiest people in the world typically are the biggest buyers of WL insurance , because of the value it has . On the other hand there are many people who are self insured feeling that the money they have acquired is sufficient to cover the needs of their family in the event of their demise . Obviously those people do n't know what the wealthiest people know about WL insurance . So in order to determine what kind of life insurance you should consider , -LRB- there are over 10 different kinds of life insurance -RRB- , and how much is appropriate , you should consult with a life insurance professional - preferably one who is not tied to just one provider and can help you to implement the program that will be the best for you . If you would like to talk about this further you can call or email me . I 'm only licensed in Hawaii , but I 'm happy to help you with the more important questions .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Does A Basic Renters Insurance Policy Cover ?
A good renters insurance policy will cover your personal belongings for fire , lightning , wind , vandalism and other named perils as well as theft and liability . It covers everything but the building and items owned by the building . It is the landlords responsibility to cover those . There are some basic fire policies that are more limited in nature so make sure you know what you are buying .
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
If you 're insured with a reputable company and a good agent , your renters policy should include theft . All a renters policy is is a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It 's there to cover your stuff and your liability . It 's rare , but there are companies that offer coverage that may not include theft . This coverage form is called `` Basic Form '' and it will not cover theft . Never , never , never accept a policy written on a basic form for your renters coverage . The most common form is Broad Form , and it will cover theft . Most companies and agents will use this when writing your renters policy . Do n't accept anything less .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Massachusetts does not require you to obtain `` Renters '' insurance as it does auto insurance but your landlord or just good judgment may suggest this coverage be considered . Renters or Tenant/homeowners coverage provides coverage in three principal areas ; Damage to your personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture and/or household items -RRB- , Additional expenses to live in temporary quarters should your apartment or building be damaged or destroyed by a fire , wind or other covered cause , Personal liability coverage should certain acts cause injury or damage to someone , possibly your neighbors or even the building you occupy . Anyone responsible for maintaining a household should at least consider securing this type of coverage . It beats digging into your savings after a storm or fire or waiting for the Red Cross to give you a shirt , a bed and a hot meal . The cost for a basic policy would be in the $ 150-200 per year range . It certainly would be considered as important as maintaining comprehensive and collision insurance on a used car . In fact , simply increasing your deductibles on your car insurance may reduce your premiums enough to permit you to secure a basic policy .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Renter 's Insurance is not required by state law , but many landlords will require that you carry renter 's insurance as part of your lease agreement . This is because Renter 's Insurance comes with liability insurance protection , so , in some cases , if you damage the premises , they can collect from your Renter 's Insurance policy . That coverage usually applies for accidentally created fires -LRB- for example -RRB- . Fortunately , most people can buy Renter 's insurance for about $ 10 - $ 12 per month -LRB- it might be less and some basic policies only cost about $ 5.00 / month -RRB- . Send me an email and I can get you a rate !
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
A renters policy is essentially a homeowners policy that does not cover the structure . It has two basic coverages , Property Coverage which is designed to make you `` whole '' -LRB- within the definitions of the policy -RRB- should you have a `` covered loss '' and suffer economic loss in excess of the deductibleas a result . It also covers personal liability for bodily injury or property damage that the renter is liable for by law .
There are 3 policy forms for property insurance . Basic , Broad and Special . Basic will cover , Fire , Lightning , Windstorm or Hail , Explosion , Smoke , Vandalism , Aircraft or Vehicle Collision , Riot or Civil Commotion , Sinkhole Collapse , Volcanic Activity . Broad will cover all of Basic plus falling objects , weight of ice , sleet or snow , and accidental water damage . Special will cover everything that is not specifically excluded . If the policy does not exclude the coverage you are covered . Common exclusion are government action , nuclear hazard , war and military action , flood , fungus and pollution . Special Form gives you the broadest coverage 's . Now with special form you have a choice of an HO3 or an HO5 An HO3 is named perils for personal property and HO5 is open perils minus exclusion for personal property . While HO3 is the most common policy purchased the HO5 is the broadest coverage you can get in a homeowners policy .
A basic Renter-type policy should cost you about $ 150-200 per year . A basic policy would include a nominal amount of coverage on your personal property -LRB- $ 15,000 or so -RRB- , cover you for specific named perils such as fire , theft , wind , vandalism , etc. and provide coverage for the additional cost of living in temporary quarters should your building be damaged by an insured peril and become unfit for living . In addition , it would be common for this type of policy to provide a nominal -LRB- $ 100,000 -RRB- amount of personal liability coverage . Although not included in most basic policies , I 'd suggest `` Replacement Cost '' coverage be requested . Should your property be damaged , instead of paying you the depreciated value of the property , you could claim the full cost for its repair or replacement . Very important in a serious claim ! Of course , higher limits and additional coverages should be available for an additional charge .
It varies by UL policy and company , but here are a few basics . There are basically 2 parts to all ULs , but there may be more . The one I have has 3 parts . Part A is how much you pay into for just the life insurance coverage and part B is what goes into the accumulation account to make the policy grow money wise . A UL has flexible premiums meaning you can pay in as little or as much as you want within a specified amount within the contract guidelines . There is also the target amount which is what you probably should be paying in minimally . If you pay the minimum , it basically is a term policy that continues . If you decide you want the account to grow , you can put more money into to make the cash accumulation grow . I usually tell the clients I work with to think of it as a permanent life policy with a high yield bank savings account since most will offer you at worst a 3 % return for ever dollar you put into the accumulation section of the account . Do keep in mind that rates maybe be more or less depending on the policy and current interest rates that the insurance company uses . There are many other factors in these types of life policies , but that is the basics of it .
Primarily renter 's insurance is designed to protect your personal belongings that you have in your home that you rent . Renter 's insurance may replace items that are stolen from your home , or are damaged or destroyed by fire or flooding . You need to inquire with your insurance agent as to exactly what kinds of incidents are covered by any particular policy . For example in areas that are prone to hurricanes or tornadoes you may need to buy a rider in addition to the basic renter 's insurance , or you may need to buy hurricane insurance specifically .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
No one will require you to maintain Renters Insurance other than a current or future landlord but certainly good judgment would suggest this type of coverage be considered . Typical Renters or Tenant/homeowners policies provide coverage in three principal areas ; They cover damage to your personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture and/or household items -RRB- , Additional living expenses you might incur while occupying temporary living quarters should your apartment or building be damaged or destroyed by a fire , wind or some other covered cause and Your Personal Liability should certain acts cause injury or damage to someone , possibly your neighbors or even the building you occupy . Anyone responsible for maintaining a household should at least consider securing this type of coverage . It beats digging into your savings after a storm or fire or waiting for the Red Cross to give you a shirt , a cot or a hot meal . The cost for a basic policy would be in the $ 150-200 per year range . This type of coverage should be considered as important as maintaining comprehensive and collision insurance on your car . In fact , simply increasing your deductibles on your car insurance may reduce your premiums enough to permit you to secure a basic policy .
The basic ideas for a homeowners policy and a renters policy are the same . The policies are developed alongside one another in the insurance company . The renter is not responsible for the structure or residence . A renters policy doesnt have coverage for the residence . Most of the remaining provisions are the same as with the homeowners policy .
It depends on many factors , but here are the main factors for price . 1 -RRB- What 's the policy type ? 2 -RRB- What 's the face amount ? 3 -RRB- What 's your gender ? 4 -RRB- What 's your age ? 5 -RRB- What 's your general health like ? 6 -RRB- Are you a tobacco user ? What you should look at are basically two main questions . What does the life insurance cover and how much do I need ? Cost is a factor for a policy , but it 's much more important to get the right policy with the riders you 'll need .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
What Is Critical Illness In Insurance ?
Critical illness insurance is like life insurance but is a living benefit . Most policies will pay out on some type of health event like Stroke , Heart Attack , Cancer , and others . It usually pays a specified amount to the policy holder to take care of medical bills , lost income , additional care , or home modification .
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Critical illness is a specialized form of what used to be called `` dread disease '' coverage . More comprehensive than a simple cancer plan , critical illness policies normally pay a lump sum benefit on first diagnosis of listed medical conditions including heart attack , cancer , stroke and another 3 - 7 named conditions . Most carriers do not issue critical illness after age 65 or 70 . Buy a health insurance plan , not a life plan with a critical illness rider .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
In sports there are `` odds '' ... What are the odds of hitting a hole in one ? An average golfer on a 200-yard par-3 : 150,000 to 1 . Odds of myself or David/Ted -LRB- above -RRB- ... one in TWO ... Ladies are lucky ... it 's only 1 on 3 ... So yes , `` cancer insurance '' is a great protection plan to own . Let 's compare Cancer insurance to protection plan that is growing in popularity , Critical Illness -LRB- CI -RRB- . Cancer insurance covers ?? ... . YES ... ding , ding , ding ... cancer . Most benefits are paid out on a scheduled basis . Meaning you get `` so much for each item eligible for a claim '' . Each treatment/service has a named value : Chemo - So much per treatment . Surgery - a specific amount . Hospital stay - A specific amount per day . Possibly more for ICU . & it goes on ... . Critical Illness pays a lump sum upon diagnosis . There is no need to continually update the carrier about treatments , surgeries , & hospital stays . Think of it as upfront money vs. trickling in over time . Since Critical Illness Insurance typically ahs a benefit for Cancer , heart attack/stroke , and other life changing illnesses -LRB- like blindness & paralysis -RRB- , the one policy can do a lot more for you over a lifetime . Which is better , Cancer or Critical Illness insurance ? As you will see in many of my posts ... UNDERWRITING is the key . Always buy the most coverage for your monthly premium dollars based on the underwriting . - gravy
Generally , critical illness insurance is not a taxable benefit . The money that is used to purchase critical illness insurance has already been taxed , since critical illness insurance is not tax exempt as a medical expense . Thus , the benefits paid if the critical illness policy pays out , are not taxable .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
Life insurance covers you in the event of death . Critical illness covers you while you are alive , providing cash to care for the extra expenses involved with a critical illness . Some life insurance policies offer a critical illness rider that will pay a portion of the death benefit while you are still alive . if you are diagnosed with a critical illness
This depends on the amount of money that you have saved to cover the costs associated with the immediate needs of a critical illness . If you have funds available to cover medical expenses of a critical illness , you may not need critical illness insurance . If you do not have the extra funds , than critical illness insurance can keep you from financial ruin .
Accident and Critical illness insurance are similar in structure , but cover different things . Both policies will typically pay out a lump sum or up the benefit amount directly to the insured or a provider of their choice . The difference however is that accident plans only cover medical expenses associated with an accident where as critical illness insurance pays lump sum upon diagnosis of a major critical illness . Make sure to read the list of covered critical illness ' in the policy before purchasing .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
You should look into critical illness as a part of your medical insurance defensive planning . If your family has a predisposition to disease or confinement based of a disposition to illness , then you should consider critical illness insurance . Your vocation may have health consequences not paid by workers compensation . If thats true or highly possible then you should consider critical illness .
If your family has a predisposition to chronic illness or specific disease , you may want to consider critical illness insurance to supplement your medical coverage . It 's also important to address critical illness offered in medical group plans because the price can be cheaper that individual critical illness insurance coverage .
Critical illness policies cover as many as 15 or so different kinds of illness . Most critical illness plans pay a lump sum cash benefit on first diagnosis provided you meet the terms of the policy . In evaluating critical illness plans read and understand the definitions and make sure you buy a health based plan .
They are two totally different policies . Critical Illness pays if you are diagnosed with a critical illness such as heart attack or stroke or other critical illness . A disability policy covers you if you are unable to perform your job due to an accident or illness . It will pay a percentage of your income for a specified period .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is The 403B Retirement Plan ?
A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- retirement plan used to be called tax sheltered annuities , but with the addition of mutual funds , has kept its section of the code title . Self-employed ministers , public school and certain non-profit employees of 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- are generally the plan participants of a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- which has similar tax treatment of a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- .
As long as your company allows roll overs into their retirement plan , you can roll your 403b money into that 401k plan . One exception may be if you have previously comingled your 403b funds with another IRA . Your company 401k plan administrator should be able to answer your specific questions . You can also roll your 403b into a traditional IRA or Roth IRA . Here is a link to an IRS rollover chart which shows all the directions retirement money can move . WEBSITELINK
They are primarily the same thing -LRB- an employer sponsored retirement plan -RRB- but one is offered by a for profit employer and the other -LRB- 403b -RRB- is offered through a government entity such as a municipality or school district . The contribution rules are similar and allow employees to put money away pre tax for retirement .
That is a great question ! A 403b is a retirement plan that is set up for certain occupations , like school teachers , Ministers , and some tax exempt organizations . They can be funded by annuities , custodial mutual fund accounts , or a combination of both . The contributions can be made to an account pre-tax , and taxed upon withdrawal , or they can be in a Roth and taxes on contributions paid in result in tax free withdrawals . You will want to see which plan options are available to you , and speak with an adviser about what would work best for you . Thanks for asking !
QDRO or a Qualified Domestic Relations Order comes through the courts in a divorce case . This order typically deals with divorce settlements concerning finances and retirement plans such as IRAs , Roth IRAs , 401Ks , 403bs and cash value life insurance plans . If you or your ex spouse owns cash value life insurance , then yes , the cash value is included in QDRO calculations . In most cases , term life insurance plans are not included in these calculations because there is no value unless a death occurs . You or your ex spouse can also be court ordered to carry a term life policy to cover alimony and or child support in case of an early death .
A Roth 401k is a designated Roth account . A designated Roth account is a feature in new or existing 401k , 403b or 457b plans that permit such plans to accept designated Roth contributions . The combined amount you can contribute to all designated Roth accounts in any one year for an individual under 50 years of age is $ 17,500 for 2014 . If you are age 50 or older by the end of 2014 , you can add an additional $ 5,500 in catch-up contributions . You can also contribute to both a Roth 401k and a Roth IRA in the same year which can increase the total contribution amount by $ 6,500 if you are 50 or older .
Yes a Variable Annuity can be rolled over most of the time . However , you should be aware of any possible surrender charges associated with the Variable Annuity before you roll it over to a new product . The only exception to this would be if the Variable Annuity was inside a 403b/TSA . Then it would be subject to 403b specific regulations which could very likely prohibit the transfer if you are still employed through that company .
You should know why youre using the retirement plan you have and why youdid n'tselect another . The list of qualified plans has many options : SIMPLE IRA , SEP IRA , 401k , 403b , 457b , 412i , etc. . Non-qualified , but tax advantaged retirement plans like life insurance and annuities .
Simple IRA is actually an acronym for Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees Individual Retirement Account . It is an employer sponsored plan similar to 401ks , 403b , etc. , but with much lower admin costs . It can be funded with pretax dollars , but is still subject to FICA , FUTA , SUTA . The contribution limits for 2013 are $ 12,000 for those age 50 and younger and $ 14,500 for those older than age 50 .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Guaranteed Renewable Disability Insurance ?
Guaranteed renewable disability insurance is a policy that is guaranteed to be renewed as long as premiums are paid . However , having a guaranteed renewable disability insurance policy does not guarantee that the premiums will not go up . In order to lock in the premiums for a disability policy , it must be both non-cancellable and non-renewable .
This one is easy to answer : do nothing . Yes , thats right . Virtually all term policies these days are guaranteed renewable . This means that you will retain coverage without going through underwriting again . So when it renews , you will get a bill for the renewed rate . Or , if your policy is on automatic bank draft , the renewal rate will be deducted from your bank account . Next question : what will the renewal rate be ? The thing is , you wont know until the policy renews . You will note on the data page of your policy that guaranteed maximum renewal rates are illustrated . These numbers can be very scary because they represent worst-case scenario rate increases . The actual renewal rates are determined when the contract renews , not when it is issued . Fortunately , actual renewal rates typically dont come close to these guaranteed maximum numbers . But they can be high . Once the premium guarantee period is over , the policy can renew at a rate much larger than the original premium . If the insurance carrier needs cash , or wants to bolster its reserves , or for any other reason wants more money , renewal term premiums are a good way to get it Is this bad ? Is this good ? It all depends . If the insured unfortunately has cancer , or some other very serious high risk factor , then even that high rate might seem like a bargain . If you still need life insurance , and you cant qualify for a better deal elsewhere , then even if you pay much more money in premium , the death benefit can still be worth it . But if fortunately you are healthy and do not have high risk factors in your lifestyle , then you just might qualify for a better rate with another company . Go for it ! Just make sure you get prequalified so you know before applying that the change would be in your favor . And very important : dont drop your current policy until the new one is in force . You want to avoid a gap in coverage .
Guaranteed renewable disability insurance is a policy that is guaranteed to be renewed as long as premiums are paid . However , having a guaranteed renewable disability insurance policy does not guarantee that the premiums will not go up . In order to lock in the premiums for a disability policy , it must be both non-cancellable and non-renewable .
Whether you can renew term life insurance depends on a few things . Most insurers offer guaranteed renewable term insurance up to a certain age such as 70 , 75 and in some cases 80 . That does n't mean that you can renew it at the same premium amount as you had the first time ! The premium amount is adjusted upward for every year you live . If yours is not a guaranteed renewable you may have to qualify according to your health condition as well in order to renew or buy a new policy . These are some of the reasons it 's better to buy Whole Life or convert your term to whole life while it 's available and relatively affordable .
Annual renewable term is a Term Life policy that will allow you to renew it each year without having to go through additional underwriting or medical exams . It does not guarantee that the premium will remain the same . In fact usually the illustration will show you the scheduled increases in premiums per year or per 5 years . It also does not guarantee that you can renew it every year forever ! Most term policies will not allow you to renew past age 75 no matter what you are willing to pay .
Annual renewable term life insurance is renewable at an ever increasing annual premium . Some guaranteed level term life insurance can renew after the guaranteed period is over at an ever increasing annual premium . Many planners recommend purchasing term life insurance with a conversion clause to extend permanent coverage as another alternative to renewable premiums .
Many term life insurance policies are renewable to age 80 or 90 . Unless you have some type of rider that guarantees renewability at reasonable rates , your premium during the renewal period will jump sky high . And of course , if you are still alive when the renewable period ends , you may be unable to find a new policy , especially if you have developed a serious health condition . Rather than allow your term policy to enter the renewable period , it is usually a better option to convert part or all of your term insurance to permanent insurance while you can -LRB- if you indeed want your life insurance to continue -RRB- . Not all policies are convertible , and if they are , they will have strict guidelines as to how long you have to convert them to permanent insurance . So check on these features long before your term will end . In essence , converting will allow you to keep the same health rating you had when you applied for your term policy , regardless of your health at the time of conversion . The rates will be higher because you are older , and because you will be paying premiums for permanent insurance . However , they may not be as high as the renewable rates would have been , and your rates after converting often are locked in for your lifetime .
Heres a simple model for you . I am sure you know about term insurance . This is a product designed to give you the absolutely lowest premium for a certain amount of time . The premium and death benefit could be guaranteed from 10 to 30 years . No cash will be accumulated for your use . -LRB- Of course , that is one big reason why the premium is so low -RRB- . The problem we all face with term insurance is that once the guarantee period is over , the price typically skyrockets . I have actually see the premium increase tenfold at the time of renewal ! Now lets suppose that you could have something that would act like permanent term insurance . The premium would be as low as can possibly be . No cash would be accumulated . But the price would never go up . You would have , in essence , a lifetime guarantee . That , my friend , is called guaranteed universal life insurance . Whole life insurance is very similar . Guaranteed premium . Guaranteed death benefit . Lifelong coverage . The big difference is that whole life insurance also emphasizes cash accumulation . It provides very strong guarantees on the cash . So it costs a lot more than guaranteed universal life insurance . It should be noted that providing a lifetime guarantee is only one of a variety of uses for universal life insurance . It is a flexible product and can be designed to accumulate cash as well . It can also be designed to accommodate a variety of premium payments . But when the financial planning objective is to secure a lifetime coverage at the lowest possible guaranteed cost , there is no better product .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
I am in agreement with the answers above , but will add that not all Annual Renewable Term Life Insurance guarantees renewability for the following year without some health underwriting . In fact , most ART policies are only guaranteed renewable for a set number of years , which can be as short as one or three .
Some coverage characteristics of Disability Insurance that are beneficial to the insured are as follows : 1 -RRB- Guaranteed renewable or guaranteed non-cancellable ; 2 -RRB- Own occupation feature ; 3 -RRB- Coverage to age 65 ; 4 -RRB- Elimination period that fits with how long you could afford to live without your paycheck ; 5 -RRB- Residual disability feature ; 6 -RRB- Cost of Living increase ; 7 -RRB- Future benefit increases guaranteed ; and 8 -RRB- Choice of how what % of your income you want to replace .
Term insurance comes with many option . First , consider the reason for buying the insurance and find a product that meets that need . If you are covering a mortgage for example you might want to consider a 20 or 30 year term policy . There are two options here . Decreasing or Mortgage term or level term . I prefer level term due to the fact that many people do not remain in the same home for the life of the mortgage any more . There are policies that will add mortgage disability and Return of Premium . Next , how long will I need this coverage , 1 year , 5 years , ten years ? Also , what is my budget ? With term insurance the shorter the term the less the initial premium , so a on year term will be less than a 20 year term , at least initially . Every time the policy renews , the premium will increase . Is the policy renewable and convertible . Renewable means that you can renew the policy at the end of the term even if your health gets bad . Convertible means that you can convert the policy , or part of the policy to a whole life plan , regardless of health . If you need to keep the insurance for a lengthy period of time I highly recommend a policy that is renewable and convertible . A good agent can help you determine your best choice for your individual situation .
Whole life insurance is for a very special kind of person . First of all , you are someone who sees the need for life insurance protection on a lifelong basis . Not just to cover the mortgage , not just to protect your family , not just as a supplement for your retirement . You face the fact that as life goes on , your need for life insurance changes , but for many people , the need is always there . And it could be for you . You know that if you bought term insurance , odds are you 'd end up buying another policy anyway , after that one renews . At a higher price . And hopefully youre insurable . Might as well lock in to guaranteed rates on a permanent basis . This brings up the second point . You are a guarantee-oriented type of person . You realize that life insurance is the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it has to be strong . Reliable . You do n't want too many variables in this product because , if you have a shaky foundation , your whole portfolio could crumble . Therefore , you want a guarantee on the premium , and you want a guarantee on the death benefit . You are also someone who appreciates the added benefit of cash value inside whole life insurance . For many people , whole life insurance is the guaranteed portion of their asset portfolio . No other product gives better guarantees -LRB- go ahead and check out the interest rates on guaranteed products out there . Then compare them to the guarantees whole life gives you . -RRB- On top of that , with a top-flight company , the dividends - the non-guaranteed portion of the cash build up - can be pretty rich . With a little strategic thinking , those dividends can enhance the value of that product . They can be used to offset the cost . They can be used to enhance the survivor benefit . They can be used to put cash in your pocket . They can be used to offset the cost of another policy . Lastly , whole life insurance is for disciplined people . In order to receive all the benefits named above , you need to stick to the payment schedule . It 's a fixed-premium product and will not tolerate underfunding , or over funding , or skipping payments . If you realize the bang for the buck you can get with whole life insurance , and have the discipline to stick to a premium payment schedule , then you 'll be glad you bought this policy .
Just as the name sounds , a 5 year term insurance policy only guarantees the premiums will remain the same for the first 5 years - after that the policy becomes annually renewable and the premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- . Many companies feature a minimum 10 year policy and the rates are often cheaper to secure a 10 year term policy than a 5 year policy . Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure is commonly seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis -RRB- .
Renewable Life Insurance is life insurance that can be renewed when the policy ends . When the policy is renewed , coverage is extended for another set period of time at a higher rates . When annually renewable , the policy will be extended for one year at that price , then can be renewed the following year at a higher price if you so choose .
An auto insurance carrier can not drop you mid term during a policy period unless you fail to make your premium payments or if you lied on your application . Now keep in mind , polices are self terminating . So when you purchase a 6 month policy for example , after the 6 months the policy self terminates . At renewal the insurance carrier will chose to offer you or not offer you a renewal , or another 6 months of insurance if they have determined the risk -LRB- that would be you the policy holder -RRB- have exceeded their risk tolerance . Each time you come up for renewal the insurance company will review you -LRB- the risk -RRB- and determine if you are a good risk or not . Then the insurance company will either offer you a renewal or chose not to offer you a renewal . It 's the insurance companies choice .
Term life insurance can have a couple of different guarantees . The first guarantee is the premiums are guaranteed level for the term purchased . For example , a 20 year term life insurance policy has guaranteed level premiums for 20 years regardless of change in health , location or occupation . The second type of guarantee is the renewability of the term policy . You may purchase the above mentioned 20 year term policy with level premiums for 20 years , but the policy may be guaranteed until age 85 , of course for a much higher premium .
Yes . Most insurance policies will renew indefinitely upon the designated renewal period , unless something happens . Some examples of things that can happen that will cease the automatic renewal are : you cancel your policy ; you do n't pay your premium ; you make a lot of claims and your insurance company submits a letter of non-renewal ; you committed fraud and the insurance company cancels the policy . These are just a few of the reasons a policy might cease . However , absent some type of notice your policy will renew . I hope this helps .
Non-renewals are more common that cancels in my opinion . The difference is that basically they will keep the policy until the renewal , then not continue coverage beyond that . If you have been non-renewed , it is a good idea to start talking to insurance agents right away , as , depending on why you are being non-renewed -LRB- they should give you a reason -RRB- it may take some time to find an insurance company that is willing to accept you . Make sure to tell the agents you are talking to that you have been non-renewed by your current insurance and why . It is important info so that they can get you accurate quotes .
There are guarantees in a term life insurance policy . Normally the premium is guaranteed both for the term specified and future renewals if the owner decides to exercise that option . Often there is a guarantee of insurability that allows a policyholder to convert the policy to a permanent form of life insurance . The death benefit is guaranteed to remain the same as long as premiums are paid on time . There can be other guarantees such as waiver of premium .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Which Medigap Policy Is Best ?
In order to determine what plan is best for you , I would need to know more about you such as your age , gender , any tobacco usage , married or single -LRB- determines availability of a household discount on rates -RRB- , medical history -LRB- if outside open enrollment period -RRB- , and other factors to provide accurate figures and suggest a proper course of action that best serves your needs . For the overall populace , the most comprehensive -LRB- and most popular -RRB- Medigap plan is plan F as it covers all Medigap benefits at 100 % . Plan G is the second most popular plan because it 's identical to plan F except it does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . So how do you decide between the two ? It comes down to price . Since Medigap policies are standardized -LRB- meaning a plan F from company A is the exact same plan F from company B -RRB- , the only difference between the coverages is the price you pay for them . With the only difference between plans F and G , if the annualized premiums total more than a difference of $ 147 , then plan G offers you the better deal - if the total is less than $ 147 , then plan F is the better deal . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any questions , including quote requests , plan comparisons . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
It can be overwhelming research Medigap on your own . The best way to choose a Medigap Plan is to work with an independent agent . Trying to navigate the internet is time consuming and actually limits your Medigap choices . However you wish to proceed , make sure you look at a comparison chart and Outline of Coverage for the 10 standardized Medigap Plans . They each have varying benefits . You 'll want to determine which benefits are important to you and which Medigap plan best fits your budget . The two most popular plans are Medigap Plan F and Plan G. Medigap Plan F will cover all the gaps in Medicare coverage . You do n't have to meet any deductibles , co-pays or co-insurance . Medigap Plan G acts just like Plan F -- after you 've met the small $ 147 annual Part B deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F . If you would like assistance in comparing plans and premiums , please contact me . My personalized service is always free .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap insurance are health plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in your Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- coverage . Original Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . While 20 % may not seem like a lot , it can add up to substantial medical bills very quickly . The big advantage of Medigap plans are that they can help you create a very predictable healthcare expense structure which is extremely beneficial for those on a fixed income . There are 10 different plans to choose from and each Medigap plan features a different combination of benefits , however , they are all standardized -LRB- meaning the benefits are the exact same under a given Medigap plan regardless of which company you buy it from -RRB- . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
You can change your Medigap Plan at any point throughout the year . You do not have to wait for AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period from Oct. 15 - Dec 7 -RRB- . The Annual Election Period only applies to Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug Plans . You 'll have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan if you are not in your Open Enrollment Period or other Guaranteed Issue situation . To medically qualify , you have to answer health questions on the insurance application and then get approved through the medical underwriting department . It is best to contact Medicare or an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to see if you are still in Open Enrollment or a Guaranteed Issue situation . If you have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan , an independent agent can review your health history and help determine which insurance companies are best suited for your situation . There are several reasons why you may want to change your Medigap plan -LRB- lower premium , more benefits , less benefits -RRB- . The main reason people want to change is usually because of price . Over time , premiums increase and what you may be paying for Plan F may be very different from your neighbor . Although Medigap plan benefits are standardized , the price is not . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can provide quotes for your Medigap Plan so you can compare it to what you 're currently paying . Please feel free to read this article which gives a little more detail about changing your Medigap insurance . WEBSITELINK Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you with your specific situation .
The best Medigap Insurance Plan will be specific to each individual 's needs . What is the best for one will not be the best for another . Medigap Plan F is the most comprehensive plan on the market but depending on your needs it may or may not be the best for you . The way to determine what is the best Medigap Plan for you is to contact a independent agent that specializes in Medigap Insurance . They will be able to evaluate your needs and help you match the best plan that meets those needs . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Since all Medigap plans are standardized , the benefits are exactly the same with every insurance company . This means that Medigap Plan F with ABC insurance company is the exact same Medigap Plan F with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is price . Medicare does not regulate the price of Medigap Plans ... just the benefits . That 's why there is such a competitive market . Many Medicare Beneficiaries like the idea of purchasing Medigap through a well known insurance company , but that does n't mean you are going to get the best price . Medigap is not like health insurance for under age 65 where a Medical director approves or denies your bills . Medigap payments are made by the insurance carrier if it 's a Medicare approved item because they have to -- it 's the law . I suppose that was the long way of saying there is n't one insurance company that has the best Medigap coverage . They all offer the same standardized plans and pay the bills based upon CMS regulations .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
Most people enjoy Medigap Plan F because of it 's comprehensive health coverage and consider it to be the best Medigap policy . Medigap Plan F will pay all your Medicare approved charges that Original Medicare Part A and Part B does n't cover . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance with Plan F . There is a lot of talk about Medigap Plan G becoming the `` best '' Medigap Plan . It works just like Plan F by covering all your Medicare approved charges not paid by Original Medicare -- after you 've satisfied the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium with Plan G is usually much less than Plan F. Even when you add in the Part B deductible there is still savings for the same Medigap benefits . If I can assist you with your specific Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
There is an `` open enrollment period '' during which you can buy any Medigap insurance policy -LRB- Plan F -RRB- sold in your state beginning the month in which you turn age 65 and you are enrolled in Medicare Part B . During this six month open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap insurance offered , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people in good health . If you apply for Medigap coverage after your open enrollment period , there 's no guarantee that an insurance company will sell you a Medigap policy if you dont meet the medical underwriting requirements , unless you 're eligible because you have group health insurance through an employer or union . If this is your situation , the Medigap enrollment period begins when you sign-up for Part B . There are some situations if you are under 65 and are eligible for Medicare because of a disability you could be eligible for Medigap coverage . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- and are under 65 , some states require at least one type of Medigap policy to be offered to you .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is A Declaration Page For Renters Insurance ?
A `` Declarations Page '' in any insurance policy is simply the page in the policy that states what the insurance company is insuring and what benefits will payable if the insured incurs a loss and also covers details like `` what if the insured causes the loss due to negligence ' and a life insurance policy in most cases will state in the case of `` suicide '' the policy will not pay
Located near the front of the policy , the declaration page lists the information that personalizes the coverage found in the following pages . It also lists all the forms that comprise the policy . This is sort of a table of contents . Your mortgage company will want a copy of this page of your policy . You should review it carefully as it contains a great deal of very important information When you look at the declaration page you can identify the name of the insurance company . Agents often represent multiple companies and this tells you exactly which company is insuring your home . Here you will find the policy number which represents the individual nature of the contract . The declaration page will describe the type of policy . There are several different forms of homeowners policies and this will tell you which form is being used . The declaration page will identify who is being insured . This is very important , particularly when there is a liability claim . The named insured should read like the deed to the property . The property should be clearly identified . There may be more than one insured and their relationship is often included in the declaration . This is where the mortgage company will be identified and the address of the company will be included , along with the loan number . Additional mortgagees can also be listed here with the same information . The name and address of the agent handling the policy also appears in the same general area . This is where you can go for service on the policy . The declarations make very important statements setting the coverage limits . While they are often identified by letters -LRB- A-M -RRB- there will be definitions in the subsequent pages . This shows the limit of each of the coverages in the policy . It usually shows the limit of liability . It usually shows the deductible applied to property claims , and states the annual premium for the policy . There is a lengthy list of forms that comprise the bulk of the policy . These attached pages detail exactly the nature and extent of the coverages , and the limits and exclusions that apply . As a homeowner you should look down this list and ask the agent to explain any coverage that you dont understand . This can trigger conversations about additional available coverages that might be appropriate for you and which you should have . This is a very important section and one that you dont want to overlook . After this is usually a general description of the property itself . It will identify the fire district , location of the nearest fire hydrant , proximity to a fire station and the protection class used to develop the premium . It will probably comment on the roof and indicate if there is any special rating applied . The company has relied on this information much of which youre provided and it should be correct . It is quite likely that your state has laws that require certain notifications to be on the declaration page , perhaps warning you that the policy does not cover flood , earthquake or building code upgrade coverage . Finally the declaration page will identify the company , its address , telephone number and state who is paying the premium and the address where communications are being sent .
All insurance polices have declarations pages . This is the page that declares your coverage 's . Usually this page on the front part of your policy -LRB- one of the first pages -RRB- and is one or maybe two pages long . The declarations page does not break down how the coverage 's work but simply state the coverage 's . It is important to note if you do not see a certain coverage on the declarations page you can bet you do not have this coverage .
The Declarations Page -LRB- also referred to as the ` dec page ' -RRB- on a Homeowners policy is the title page which details the Named Insured , the Term of Coverage , the Insured Mailing & Property Address and the Limits of Coverage for each Section . If there is a mortgage on the property , the mortgagee should be listed on the declarations page ; this is particularly important because the insurance carrier will mail the ` Mortgagee Copy ' of the declarations page to the address listed with the account number listed being the reference to the mortgage company . Each insured person should check to make sure that this information is correct in order to avert unnecessary communication with the mortgage company .
A declaration page would show coverage had been purchased , when it had been purchased and when it would expire . However I would not accept a declaration page as proof of Renters Insurance or any insurance for that matter . I would not accept it because there is no guarantee that the Insured or Renter will make the next payment for the policy . If he does n't , the policy would cancel and you wo n't know . If I want proof that coverage is in force , I would request a Certificate of Insurance and I would also request I be named as Certificate Holder . If I 'm named Certificate Holder , the insurance company may -LRB- depends on State Regulations -RRB- be obligated to tell you when coverage is threatened to be canceled . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
A Home Insurance declarations page also known as the ` dec page'is the cover page or summary to the limits of coverage afforded on your specific insurance policy . This page will include the Named Insured , Mailing Address , Property Address , Policy Number , Effective and Expiration Dates , Customer Service Contact Telephone Number , Claim Service Contact Telephone Number and Limits of Coverage . In addition , the declarations page usually includes the Policy Form Number which is the main policy form usually written by the ISO -LRB- Insurance Services Office -RRB- including all definitions , conditions and exclusions along with all the including endorsements that may be included with the policy . If there is a Mortgagee listed on the policy , the Mortgagee Clause will also be listed with the Name , Address & Loan Number of the mortgagee where a copy of the policy and all communication will also be directed . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The declarations page of any insurance policy regardless of whether it is home , auto , life or health , is the page that contains your basic policy information . It will usually be titled declarations page and will show your policy number , coverage 's , and company contact information . It is basically a summary of your policy .
The Declaration page of a Homeowners ' Policy is the page that outlines the coverage that is particular to your home . The Declaration -LRB- Dec -RRB- page includes the policy number and the date your policy began . It lists you as the policyholder and both your mailing and location address . It goes on to state the current property amounts including your Dwelling , Other Structures and Personal Property as well as any `` inside limits '' that may be stated for particular categories of personal property such as jewelry , fine arts , fire arms etc. . The policy Dec will state your policy deductible for property coverage and the settlement option -LRB- usually Replacement Guarantee -RRB- . Next it will state the amount of Liability coverage you have as well as any Medical Payment protection . The Dec will also show the property rating territory , proximity to a fire hydrant and fire protection class . Finally , the premium will be listed .
The life insurance policy at purchase should meet your personal unique needs . Isthe face amountadequate to cover my loved ones financial needs such as debt , income replacement or for a business the key person 's value to the company ? If cash value plans does it meet the retirement goals you were aiming for ? Once the policy is purchased the components of the policy to look for are , first the declaration page . This is one of the first pages of the policy and is a summary of coverage . the death benefit , premiums paid , terms and dates concerning your coverage . Next look for the illustration pages . These pages explain any cash value building in your policy or if term the guarantee lengths of premiums and any future rate increases . Lastly find the terms and conditions page . This page explains any exemptions , waivers or riders on your policy . Your loved ones should not be surprised at an untimely death that a benefit is eliminated or reduced . Always seek advice of a professional broker to avoid any unexpected issues .
A homeowners policy is a package of forms that identify the coverage the company is extending on the property . They are not specific to your property . The declaration page identifies all of the parties in the policy and states the absolute limits of the policy . This is the part of the legal contract that customizes the forms into an understandable whole . The declaration page is what makes the policy yours .
An suto insurance declaration page is one oart of what is considered the complete insurance contract . The declaration page specifically states the name of the insuring company , policy number and the effective and expiration date of the policy . It also lists the named insured -LRB- s -RRB- , identifies the vehicle or vehicles that are insured by the policy and the specific coverage provided to each car . Finally , it includes the term premium that is charged for the coverage provided . The complete insurance contract also includes the `` Policy Jacket '' and any amendments . Be sure to read through the complete contract and discuss it with your insurance professional to be sure you understand all the terms and conditions .
You can find out who your homeowner 's insurance is with by looking at the declarations page which will list your coverage , mortgage company and the insurer . If you ca n't find the declaration 's page , contact your mortgage company since they will likely have a record of it . If that fails , start calling different insurers !
A Declaration Page , also referred to as a `` Dec Page , '' tells you the most pertinent parts of your policy . Along with containing the personal information -LRB- name , dob , address , etc. -RRB- , it also lists your policy number , effective date , summarizes the coverage amount and states the premium . Any changes -LRB- endorsements -RRB- or discounts will also be listed on this page . The dec page also provides information on the insurance company , including how to contact them , where to call for claims , etc. .
The start date of a homeowners policy is clearly displayed on the declaration page . The actual declaration page might not reach you for a few days ; however , most agents have binding authority and can issue a certificate of insurance which includes this start date for coverage . This is particularly important when there is a real estate closing .
There are two types of life insurance fundamentally , term life insurance and permanent life insurance . Term insurance has no cash value with an exception of a return of premium rider at the end of the term . Permanent life insurance comes with different names . the most popular are whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . These all have a cash value component . Open your policy to the declaration page . This page will tell you the type of policy you have . If you find it is a permanent plan mentioned above , then turn over to the illustrations page . These pages will give you the cash value of at each policy year with the cash value of your plan .
A `` Declarations Page '' in any insurance policy is simply the page in the policy that states what the insurance company is insuring and what benefits will payable if the insured incurs a loss and also covers details like `` what if the insured causes the loss due to negligence ' and a life insurance policy in most cases will state in the case of `` suicide '' the policy will not pay
The Declaration Page of your policy outlines your specific coverage for the policy as issued by your insurance company . The `` Dec Page '' will show the effective date that the policy period began as well as it 's expiration date which is usually 1 year later . It will list your mortgage company and will also include your name and mailing address as well as the property address if different . It will then list the specific coverage for you dwelling , personal property , additional structures and Liability as well as the property deductible . If there are any it will list any inside limits to certain categories of personal property like jewelry , camera equipment etc. . Finally it will list the distance you are to a fire hydrant and/or fire station and the Fire rating classification as well as your annual premium . Your complete policy consists of the declaration , the Policy Jacket which outlines the broad language coverage that the policy provides as well as it limitations and exclusions , and any applicable endorsements .
An Auto policy on the st page should have what is called your declarations page . This will have on it Bodily injury liability limits example would $ 25,000 per person / $ 50,000 -LRB- this is medical bills they pay to others -RRB- Then it should have Property damage example $ 10,000 -LRB- this is the coverage to the cars or fence or tree or what ever you cause damage to other then medical bills -RRB- Then there is a section that you should have that is Uninsured and underinsured This should be matching limits to your liability limits listed above . This if for you if you get hit by someone that has no insurance or has insurance but there limits are not high enough to pay all your medical bills that you got from the accident then there is medical pay usually this is 5,000 this is for you also incase you are hurt on near or around your vehicle it also is used for funeral bills incase you die in your car you loved ones can use this to help with the funeral expense then If you have what some call `` Full '' coverage this would be the deductible part . Comprehensive or other then collision coverage less your deductible then there is collision . In Montana we do not have what some state have which is call PIP which is personal injury protection .
In New York there are few variations in the renters policy . The basic policy covers Personal Property , Additional Living Expense , Medical Payments , and Personal Liability . Many insurance carriers use their own policy forms and endorsements . A reputable agent or broker will have a specimen policy available and can outline the various coverages . Your Personal Property can be covered for Actual Cash Value or Replacement Cost . A good insurance representative can explain the difference in terms you can understand . The standard renters policy provides ` named perils ' on your personal property . ` Open perils ' commonly known as ` all risk ' is also available for more premium . Deductibles for the property coverage start at $ 100 or $ 250 and go up from there . The higher the deductible , the more the savings in premium . Many landlords require their tenants carry renters insurance and provide evidence of it - so if this is your situation , find out what the requirements are . Most insurance carriers in NY will not add the landlord as an ` additional insured ' under the personalliability section . Sometimes landlords request this in the rental agreement . Usually , a copy of the declarations page will satisfy the landlord .
Renters polices typically say $ 0 under coverage A on your declarations page in your policy . Therefore , no coverage would exisit . Renters polices contain coverage for your contents , your belongings and usually liability protection in the event you are sued .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Do They Test For In Urine For Life Insurance ?
They test the urine for a metabolite of nicotine called cotinine , in order to see if you are a tobacco user . They also test for cocaine and other illegal drugs . Creatinine or protein in the urine can be an indicator of kidney disease , or a side effect of uncontrolled diabetes , as can high glucose . The insurance company uses the urinalysis to confirm the information you put on the application , and to become aware if there are any hidden or unknown health conditions .
What tests are run for life insurance depends on the coverage applied for and vary somewhat by company . For smaller amounts there may just be a non-medical declaration and depending on whether or not anything is declared there may be no testing . If urine , and/or blood , is required , testing could include testing for bodily functions . The presence of raised levels of certain substances , such as sugar in urine , would trigger more tests . In addition , testing is done for nicotine and for traces of illegal drugs . X-rays , electrocardiograms or other tests could also be required . It is very important to be truthful when completing an application for insurance . If you have a medical condition you are concerned about , then experience and independence are important . I suggest working with a local agent/broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
Urinalysis -LRB- UA -RRB- is used by life insurance companies to detect presence of disease when applying for medically underwritten policies . Urine tests used can point to the possibility of kidney disease , UTI , diabetes , liver disease , inflammation , even cancer . Sometimes excessive exercise or dieting can affect the HOS , so try to drink a lot of water , avoid alcohol , eat balanced meals , and avoid excessive exercise in the days before your urine test . Life insurance also uses urine to test for drug and tobacco use . If you use opoids -LRB- codeine , morphine , methadone , etc -RRB- for pain , or marijuana for medical or recreational use , explain that on your application or to the examiner collecting your urine sample . And keep in mind that cotinine -LRB- a metabolite of nicotine that is detected in urine and blood -RRB- can stay in the body for a long time after using tobacco . It is best to disclose all health conditions , medications , and tobacco use to your agent ahead of time , rather than have it be a surprise on your life insurance exam . That way you can be matched with the company that will give you the best rate , your underwriter will rate you as good as possible due to your honesty , and your policy will pay out if something happens to you .
Life insurance tests urine for medically underwritten life insurance policies to detect drug and nicotine usage , among other things . Urinalyses can show evidence of diabetes -LRB- or poor diabetic control -RRB- , renal disease , cancer , blood disorders , or infection . Not all life insurance policies require a urine test ; nonmed policies do not perform blood or urine tests .
Life insurance companies use a urine test , blood test , physical measurements and possibly a resting EKG to evaluate your overall health and your risk of death . A urine test is most commonly used to test for drugs or alcohol , but may also be used to test for certain medical conditions . A larger death benefit may require additional testing .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most health insurance applications do not require blood or urine specimens . But on occasion an underwriter will ask for a physical exam including certain tests . If you have a history of abnormal test results in the past , such as high cholesterol counts , or blood or sugar in your urine , testing may be requested . Sometimes an underwriter will request an EKG if you had cardiac tests in the past that were abnormal .
The tests that are done for a medically underwritten life insurance policy are a blood test and urine test . Blood and urine samples are tested for HIV , drug use , nicotine use , and to see whether the applicant has possible disease of the kidney , liver , stomach , heart and other organs .
Life insurance companies test urine for a number of things . It is a more affordable way than to test blood . However , depending on your age and face amount it is likely they will test both . Urine tests show drug , both prescription and illegal use , as well as nicotine/cotine for tobacco use . They also can find evidence of diabetes , heart issues , cancer and kidney disease .
Yes , life insurance does test for the byproduct of nicotine , called cotinine , in the urine and/or blood that is tested for a life insurance exam . Cotinine is a more reliable indicator of actually smoking a cigarette than nicotine is , as sometimes nicotine tests can detect second hand smoke . With tobacco such as cigar or pipe , a very few companies will disregard cotinine in the blood or urine as long as it it disclosed on the application and there has been no cigarette usage in the past few years . Other than that , the insured person who tests positive for nicotine/cotinine will be rated as a Smoker .
Each life insurance company has death benefit amount thresholds that require urine analysis testing . A urine analysis is a biological chemistry expose of your bodys elimination or lack thereof . A urine test checks for waste products from the kidneys , nicotine use , drug use , glucose and nitrate levels as well as specific gravity and protein amounts .
Life insurance carriers that require a blood and/or urine test to get a medically underwritten policy will test for indication of drug use . Some carriers , including Met Life , offer the option of a policy that does not require a blood or urine test . However , those carriers then usually require that the use of illegal substances be admitted on the application .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test If you 're an older individuals -LRB- e.g. age 55 -RRB- , some carriers may also ask for an EKG to be completed with the other exam requirements . If you 're a senior -LRB- e.g. age 70 -RRB- , some carriers may ask you to complete a mature assessment -LRB- congnitive and physical movement testing - e.g. memory tests , walk a distance , etc. -RRB- . Exams typically take no more than a half hour or so and can be completed in the privacy of your own home -LRB- some people prefer their work place which is also acceptable -RRB- . You do n't have to go to a doctor 's office or a clinic to have the exams done . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . Please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
While life insurance does not test directly for cancer , the blood or urine test can reveal labs that might point to cancer . Total blood count -LRB- showing excessively high or low white or red blood cell counts -RRB- would be the most obvious , but abnormal liver labs or even high protein in the urine could be examples of other tests that COULD indicate cancer . That is why , if labs are abnormal , insurance companies will often postpone until you can get a diagnosis for those results . Once the condition is treated , they will pick up where they left off .
In order to prepare for your exam you first will need to exactly what is going to happen . In other words , are you going to give blood , urinate in a cup , get a resting EKG , answer medical questions , etc. . You should ask your agent what information and test that will be requested . It is best to have an 8 hour fast before the blood and urine so you get the best chance of accurate readings . -LRB- So do n't get your blood drawn right after eating a big greasy burger . The extra cholesterol will show up and mess up your NORMAL levels -RRB- . the resting EKG you should be relaxed as well as for the the blood pressure test which they will normally take 3 readings . For the medical information , be sure you know your history including doctors and their addresses . The more you can provide if necessary , the easier underwriting will be .
Yes , any life insurance company that requires a blood test , urine test , or oral swab in order to get a life insurance policy will test for the presence of illegal drugs and cotinine -LRB- an indicator of cigarette use -RRB- . This is called a medically underwritten policy . If using a No Exam policy , they do not require an exam and do not test for drugs , although they will usually ask about drug use on the application .
Through a urine specimen . They are pretty reliable . Interestingly , I once had a client who admitted to smoking on the application , but tested negative for nicotine on the urine sample . He was approved at non-smoker rates ! People often ask if secondhand smoke shows up . The answer is yes , it can . If you inhabit a very smoky environment day in and day out , and your body has pretty much reached its saturation point for nicotine , it very well could show up on your test . This is important to know . Sometimes people ask , what if I dont admit to smoking on the application , and wait a while after my last cigarette so that I test negative ? Well , if the application asks you if you have smoked in the last 12 months and you say no , that is insurance fraud . If they audit your claim and find out you lied , they can deny the benefit even if you died for a reason unrelated to cigarettes . A word to the wise should be sufficient .
Fully underwritten life insurance requires blood and urine tests for a variety of medical items . Urine analysis can detect smoking behavior by testing for cotinine a byproduct of tobacco in cigarettes . Cigarette smoking can impact your life expectancy , so the life insurance company charges more because your life span is less based on the statistics of smokers .
MetLife offers life insurance that does drug test , and it also offers nonmed life insurance that does not drug test . The applications for both types of policies will ask if there has been illegal drug use in the past . One policy does a blood test and urine test , while the other just goes by what is on the application , which must be filled out honestly to prevent insurance fraud .
end question
start question
annuities
Which Retirement Annuity Is The Best ?
There are three types of crediting methods for tax deferred annuities : fixed interest rates , indices and separate subaccounts . Product suitability and selection is determined by your financial profile , risk tolerance and money goals . Once you determine these critical components as an annuity purchaser , you can select the best annuity suited for you .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Annuities are bought by many types of people . Mainly people who are saving for retirement . The majority of annuity owners are 50 or over . it is a retirement savings product that traditionally has lent itself to near-retirees . The closer you get to retirement age , the more conservative your retirement savings should become . This is to help eliminate volatility , which can be very harmful to retirement income . But some types of Annuities can be suitable for younger people too . Variable Annuities offer direct market investments which can be attractive to younger buyers . And Indexed Annuities offer index-linked interest gains , which can act as an in-between to a traditional Fixed Annuity or CD , and a Variable Annuity or other market investment . Many Indexed Annuities offer a Guaranteed Lifetime Income Rider . This rider is now available to people as young as 40 , and a few companies even offer it to any age . This Rider can be an excellent guaranteed source of income for a younger consumer , and supplements other retirement savings very well .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
Is an annuity a qualified retirement plan ? NO . An annuity can be `` used '' in or as part of a qualified retirement plan . An annuity on it 's own is not a qualified retirement plan . Where people get confused terminology wise is when they have a product -LRB- like an annuity -RRB- in their retirement plan , so they consider the annuity to `` be '' the retirement plan . The easiest way to think of retirement plans is they are a box , that stuff goes into . A qualified retirement plan is a box that you can put stocks , bonds , mutual funds and annuities into . The `` box '' is what makes them `` qualified . ''
There are a lot of different kinds of annuities available from dozens -LRB- perhaps even hundreds -RRB- of insurance companies . Annuities are offered by insurance companies and primarily used as a means of securing a steady cash flow during retirement years . In many ways , an annuity is very much like a pension plan offered by a company for retirement . Perhaps the best feature of an annuity is safety . Insurance companies are rated as a measurement of financial strength and have proven over the past 125 years or so to have financial stability second to no other type of financial institution . In today 's world where fewer and fewer employers offer a pension , planning for a reasonable retirement income stream seems to be challenging for most workers . An annuity -LRB- or even several -RRB- can provide the type of retirement income security that previous generations have enjoyed . Should an annuity be the only retirement income vehicle for you ? Absolutely not . Your retirement income plan should be balanced in a way that works for you . You should always seek the advice of a qualified retirement income planner so that strategies and products can be tailored to your individual situation .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Annuities are used for retirement as a source of regular income . Your annuity is tax deferred until you take out payments . The contributions you put into an annuity are not taxed , and the earnings are taxed at your tax rate during retirement . Therefore , they can be a tax favorable way of earning supplemental income during retirement . If you take out an immediate annuity , you contribute a lump sum and can begin to take out regular payments nearly immediately . A deferred annuity allows you to make payments into it over a number of years , then annuitize the annuity to receive regular payments . These payments are generally used to add to Social Security benefits and other income during retirement . Variable annuities make your annuity more of an investment , with the risks that come with variable products . Indexed annuities also allow for more growth but protect the original contribution .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
An annuity is a systematic method of accumulation and liquidation of money that you desire to set aside for a later retirement . In the accumulation phase you mostly make deposits into your account . In the liquidation phase , you can take money from the account to provide a steady monthly income for a period of years , and even for the balance of your life . Annuities pay interest like a savings account . Unlike a bank savings account , you do n't pay income tax on the interest gained until you begin liquidating your account with either a stream of payments of lump withdrawals . When interest you earn is not taxed today , it has a chance to compound and grow faster . The government will get to tax your gain at a later time , when you start taking out the money . Some annuities can be deducted from income on your 1040 tax statement and this also helps your retirement funds grow faster . These types of annuities are referred to as `` qualified annuities '' because the annuity meets the tax law qualifications that permit taking a reduction of income for the annuity deposit . While there are lots of rules , if you go back to the start and realize that an annuity is nothing more than a method of accumulating money for retirement , and also a method of distributing money from the account in retirement , you get most of what an annuity really is . Good luck .
Annuities is an excellent vehicle for savings . You can `` dollar cost `` average into a Tax Shelter Annuity which is a retirement planning instrument for employees with 501C organizations or if you have monies in Certificate of Deposit and it is fully taxable you can switch the dollars into an annuity and stop the taxation until you start taking the money out which can be delayed until 70 1/2 . An annuity is a great way to assure that you will never outlive your income as you take monthly payments from the value of the annuity . There are `` fixed annuities '' , `` indexed annuities-which are linked to an index , or you can even have a `` variable annuity that is tied directly to the performance of the stock market . If you work for a 501C organization and do have a tax shelter annuity you need to find a good financial planner .
There are two basic types of annuities : immediate and deferred . With an immediate annuity , you exchange a lump sum for an immediate income . This is often used as retirement income . All , or part of , the income received from a unit linked annuity -LRB- variable annuity -RRB- fluctuates based on the performance of the fund or funds you have selected . A deferred annuity is an accumulation plan that provides the option of an income annuity in the future . In Canada unit linked or variable annuities are called segregated funds or seg funds . They are similar to mutual funds and their value will increase or decrease based on performance . Since they are issued by insurance companies , they do offer maturity and death benefit guarantees . Some offer the resets or the locking in of maturity guarantee to protect investment gains . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
What are deferred annuities best suited for ? The challenge with this question is that the term deferred annuity has at least two `` definitions '' . I will describe two scenarios and if your question is not answered , please do not hesitate to contact me . A deferred annuity can refer to exchanging a lump sum for a guaranteed income at a point in the future . In this situation , a deferred annuity would be suited for someone who wanted a guaranteed flow of income with no management responsibilities . A life annuity may or may not include a guaranteed payout . There are different options , so ask your insurance agent for details . In addition to the income amount , taxation during the the deferral period and of the income flow should be considered . In Canada , a deferred annuity can also refer to Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- and Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- . Both of these are issued by insurance companies and offer the option of an annuity in the future . Since they are issued by insurance companies , they also offer guarantees not offered by other institutions for non-registered investments . These include potential creditor protection and estate planning opportunities , such as bypassing probate . Segregated funds are similar to mutual funds , but they offer maturity and death guarantees . In addition , some segregated funds include the `` locking in '' of gains . Depending on your individual situation , there could also be some tax advantages to these plans . These type of deferred annuities are best suited for individuals who are looking for , and would benefit from , the additional features and guarantees . This is an overview of a potentially complex subject . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A 65 Year Old Get Term Life Insurance ?
Yes . A 65 year old still qualifies for 10 year term ,15 year term , 20 year term , and 25 year term lengths . There are multiple carriers that will write 10 , 15 , and 20 year options and I know one carrier that will go up to a 25 year term .
Yes , a 65 year old can get term life insurance . Some policies are pure term , others are a hybrid of term and universal life so they can be extended . You can also get universal life with the premium locked in for a certain number of years . If you pick term insurance , be sure that you do not need the coverage past the years in the term , because it will be difficult to get a new policy after that term ends .
Yes , as long as the health is still good a 65 year old can still purchase term life insurance . There are still several life insurance companies that will underwrite up to an 80 year old for term life for a higher premium and good health . As Peggy mentioned also to consider looking at a term and UL hybrid policy at age 65 .
The cost of Term Life Insurance for a 65 year old will depend on the following : 1 -RRB- The gender of the applicant . At age 65 , men pay much higher premiums than women . 2 -RRB- The length of the term . There is a big difference between the price of 10 year Term and 20 year Term at age 65 because mortality rates rise so much as we age . 3 -RRB- The health of the applicant . Health conditions can make a huge difference in premium . For a 65 year old woman in excellent health , a 10 year term policy of $ 100,000 can cost as little as $ 35/mo . For a male of the same health , the rates jump up about $ 20/mo . For a 65 year old male with standard health , that same policy would cost about $ 90/mo . If you extend it to 20 year term , the price is nearly double . Shopping among multiple carriers can be of great benefit at age 65 , because the variances in premium are greater than when you were younger . Some companies even give preferential underwriting to older persons . Please feel free to contact me if you would like me to research your best rate from the many companies we carry .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Yes , as long as the health is still good a 65 year old can still purchase term life insurance . There are still several life insurance companies that will underwrite up to an 80 year old for term life for a higher premium and good health . As Peggy mentioned also to consider looking at a term and UL hybrid policy at age 65 .
Yes , a 65 year old can get term life insurance . Some policies are pure term , others are a hybrid of term and universal life so they can be extended . You can also get universal life with the premium locked in for a certain number of years . If you pick term insurance , be sure that you do not need the coverage past the years in the term , because it will be difficult to get a new policy after that term ends .
The percentage of the population that will die at a given age increases with age . That is , there will be a higher percentage of 50 years die in a given year than 20 year olds . That is why term life insurance is more expensive for a 50 year old than it is for a 20 year old . Imagine what the cost would be fore term life insurance for a 90 year old . The choice then , is to purchase a policy that will pay a death benefit should you die in the next term -LRB- 10 20 years for example . -RRB- The problem is that you are likely , very likely to live longer than the term . If you still want the death benefit paid to those you love , you must take steps to get a longer term policy , in which case you will probably still outlive the policy term , or buy a whole life policy . The whole life policy will have an initial premium that is greater than the term insurance premium , because it is going to pay the death benefit sometime and it guarantees not to increase the premium , ever . The whole life policy can do this because it accumulates reserves in anticipation of the increasing frequency of death claims as you age . These accumulated reserves become the cash value of the policy . Because the premium for term insurance increases as you become older there will be as point at which the whole life insurance purchased at an earlier age will be cheaper than the term policy purchased at an increased age . The cash value gives the policyholder the flexibility to make adjustments over time . It provides a cash reserve or emergency fund and a loan can be taken against the policy . If the coverage is no longer necessary it can be surrendered and the cash value will be given to the owner of the policy .
Term life insurance is generally issued in 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , and 30 year terms , with 30 being the longest . Prudential does offer a term insurance product called Worklife 65 term that offers coverage to age 65 . If you are 25 years old and take out this Prudential policy , you would be purchasing a 40 year term .
Life insurance rates for smokers may be less expensive than you realize ! Of course , as experienced brokers , our job is to shop , compare and find the lowest prices with the help of our top-rated websites and modern software . Nicotine use is one of the underwriting factors considered when determining rates . However , other factors , such as use of medications , existing conditions and height/weight will also factor in the determination of prices . A few general estimates from top-rated companies : -LRB- Rates are monthly for a healthy smoker...10-year guarantee -RRB- : $ 39 - $ 250,000 40 year old male $ 19 - $ 100,000 40 year old male $ 33 - $ 250,000 40 year old female $ 60 - $ 500,000 40 year old female $ 29 - $ 250,000 30 year old male ALSO ... $ 109.86 - $ 500,000 40 year old male 20-year guarantee
Yes . A 65 year old still qualifies for 10 year term ,15 year term , 20 year term , and 25 year term lengths . There are multiple carriers that will write 10 , 15 , and 20 year options and I know one carrier that will go up to a 25 year term .
The best life insurance for persons over age 60 is usually some sort of Permanent life insurance policy . Of course , some 60 year old 's have temporary needs , such as wanting to be able to pay off a mortgage . For those needs , Term insurance is fine . But if there is any desire to use the life insurance proceeds for final expense , or to leave money to the grandchildren , or other purposes that would require that the life insurance still be in effect when death occurs at any age , then Permanent life insurance is needed . When younger , an Insured person might count on the convertibility feature of Term life insurance to provide Permanent coverage , if needed , later on . But most Term policies are only convertible to permanent policies to between age 65 to age 75 , depending on the policy . If a 60 year old person purchases a 20 year Term policy and does not pass away before age 80 , the policy will jump sky high in premiums and there will no opportunity to convert it to a permanent policy at that time .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A million dollar policy for a 70 year old preferred non-smoker will be around $ 9785 10 year term , $ 14510 15 year term , $ 21600 for 20 year term , $ 23828 Guaranteed UL . A million dollar policy for a 70 year old standard non-smoker will be around $ 12825 10 year term , $ 22110 15 year term , $ 25930 for 20 year term , $ 32840 Guaranteed UL .
There is a date on a long term disability insurance plan benefits paid out . Some last as little as 2 years , 5 years , 10 years and some will pay benefits until age 65 or newer plans age 67 . The reason behind the age 65 or 67 years old , the insured will be eligible for social security and thought to be retired . Certainly that is not always the case .
It is impossible to say what life insurance generally costs because the rates are so different for each policy . The ads that give a rate usually are basing it on a 10 year Term policy for an extremely healthy person , and that can be as low as $ 10/month for a 25 year old male purchasing $ 250,000 of 10 year Term life insurance . Bump the applicant 's age to 55 and the price quadruples to $ 40/month . Drop his health from the best class to Standard and the rate nearly double again . Let 's say the 55 year old man gets nervous about buying 10 year Term at that age and opts for permanent coverage . The lowest price for $ 250,000 of no lapse Universal Life at for a 55 year old man rated Standard is approx $ 320/mo . As you can see , so many things affect the price . But it is very easy to compare quotes for yourself by going to a website quote engine that offers free and instant quotes . Some , like ours , will even ballpark quotes with certain health conditions , but it is always best to call to talk to someone when you have a health condition , so that you can get an accurate rate .
The payment for a $ 50,000 Life Insurance policy will vary greatly depending on age , health , and what type of policy it is -LRB- term or permanent -RRB- . A $ 50,000 Whole Life policy for a child may cost under $ 10/mo , while a $ 50,000 Whole Life policy for an 80 year old male who has some health conditions and smokes , could cost over $ 1,000 per month . A 30 year old male who had excellent health and does not smoke could get a term policy of $ 50,000 for under $ 10/mo and a guaranteed no lapse universal life policy for under $ 35/mo . You can use the quote engine on our website to get the prices for other ages and health and tobacco factors . PS I apologize ; I did not see the statement that you are a woman who is 74 years old until now . Assuming you have pretty good health , you could get a No Exam Whole Life policy of $ 25,000 for about $ 175,000 . Or you may be able to get a permanent policy of $ 50,000 for about that same price , by taking an exam . If you took $ 50,000 in Term insurance , you could possibly pay under $ 100/mo . Feel free to give me a call ; I can find your best rate very quickly and will make sure it is with a policy for which you qualify .
That is an excellent question ! Though I think I 'd be careful , I 've seen some senior citizens that get testy when you call them old ! But to answer your question , yes , you can not enroll for Medicare until you turn 65 . While it is advisable that you enroll when you turn 65 , it is possible anytime after your 65th birthday for you to sign up . You can be on Social Security before 65 , but not Medicare . Thanks for asking !
This can vary depending on the type of Annuity . Deferred Fixed Annuities currently pay anywhere from 2 % for a 3 year contract , up to 3 % for a 6 year contract . An Immediate Fixed Annuity -LRB- which pays a percentage based income for life on the amount you invest in the Annuity -RRB- currently pay up to 6.42 % for a 65 year old , all the way up to 9 % for a 75 year old . It is best to work with an independent annuity expert who can shop the current rates and give you the best company and best product available on the market .
How much is life insurance for someone 65 ? Any type of coverage will seem pricey to a younger person or a person expecting prices not to rise with age . Strangely many people do put off to 65 their purchase of a life policy . What they find is the cost is much higher than they thought . Most 65 year olds are no longer in tip top health so any underwriting discounts provided by good health will disappear , causing pricing to go upward .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Can I Get Auto Insurance With A Suspended License ?
Your license is suspended and you need to get auto insurance . The vast majority of car insurance companies do not offer coverage if you do not have a valid license . Working with an experienced broker -LRB- and our top-ranked websites -RRB- will help you find the most affordable options . Also , requesting a hardship exception from your state may allow you to drive in specific situations -LRB- with coverage of course ! -RRB- .
Great question ! There is some legwork you will have to do , but if you are willing to do it , you 'll have insurance . Find an independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a specific brand name -RRB- who can search for you . There are companies that will write you provisional policies , if you can complete whatever requirements need to be done to reinstate your license within a specified period , usually 30-45 days . Since your license has been suspended , expect that it will be more expensive for you , or very difficult to even get , a policy , especially onethat covers more than just liability . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
You ca n't with any company that I know of , policy has to be issued to a licensed driver . With a suspended license , you are not licensed to drive . Sorry . Try to get your legal issue resolved and then look for an agent/broker that can get you a policy . Good luck .
In California drivers with suspended a suspended license often get a non-owner policy that is not attached to any vehicle in order to have their license issued . This covers only liability . There are many companies that will write this type of coverage .
If the license is suspended and a condition of regaining your licenses is to obtain insurance then several carriers will issue a SR-22 form and you can get the insurance . However if you just want insurance with no option of regaining your driving privileges then you can not purchase insurance coverage .
The fine in California for not having auto insurance is $ 796.00 . However I have seen cases where the judge has increased the fine up to $ 1500.00 depending on if you are a repeat offender . Also you license can be suspended for not having insurance . If you get into an accident with no insurance your license WILL BE SUSPENDED for up to one year for not having insurance and your car most likely will be impounded . Not only that . If you are at - fault in an accident with no insurance I hope you can afford an attorney . Not having auto insurance in California is taken very seriously .
Technically yes you could purchase auto insurnace coverage without a valid driver 's license under certain circumstances only . If your license is currently revoked or suspended and you are at the end of the suspention or revokation period and need to show proof of insurance to have your license re-instated then you should be able to get auto insurance covereage . If you have not ever had a driver 's license or currently under suspention or revokation and not elegible to have your license re-instated immediately then you would typically not be able to secure auto insurance coverage .
That is a great question ! And a hard one to answer , for a couple of reasons.The first would be is this a CDL license , one seperate from your regular driver 's license ? Were all driving priveleges suspended , or just CDL ? Some states require all driving priveleges be lost with that suspension , others just the CDL . If you lost one , but not the other , it may make a difference . Another would be the company that you were recently hired by 's insurer . They might be really sticky about that , or fairly understanding , based upon how they see the reason for the suspension . They may look at it like , `` he got a speeding ticket , and just did n't pay it until years later , and only because he wanted this job , he 's probably been driving on that suspended all this time '' and go from there , or they might look at only that it had been suspended , but everything was taken care of and it was reinstated , which is good enough . If they check with the other insurance , and see that you 've been paying for auto insurance and had a clean record , -LRB- which would lead one to assume that you had kept a regular drivers license unsuspended , or that you had moved from one State to another -RRB- you could hope that they would be lenient . I hope it works out in your favor . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , you will find it extremely difficult to get auto insurance without being a licensed driver . Insurance companies are all about risk , and the risk of you getting insurance and then driving around on a suspended or no license at all is n't one they are going to be quick to take.It 's like trying to get served at a bar without ID . Even if you are old enough , they 're going to not serve you , and the auto insurance company will be the same way . Without a license , you wo n't get insured . Thanks for asking !
Yes you can , most likely with an SR22 filing . Although it is illegal , people do drive with suspended licenses . Expect to pay a higher rate with a high risk auto insurance carrier . Many people with suspended licenses must be able to show proof of insurance before their licenses will be reinstated .
Your company group auto insurance plan is likely underwritten by a major company . It 's safe to assume that they will check your driving record for recent minor and major violations . Most importantly , they will verify that you are licensed in the state that you reside . The impact of your suspended license will depend on how stringent their guidelines are . They may say nothing and monitor your MVR report closely , or possibly take alternative action . NOTE : If you have -LRB- had -RRB- a commercial driver 's license -LRB- CDL -RRB- , laws and regulations are often different than a conventional state-issued license . Important : Answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of the leading independent brokers in the US with more than 35 years of experience . His award-winning website Carinsurancezoom.org provides consumers with the lowest auto insurance rates from top-rated companies .
Typically , you can not drive with a suspended license and certainly not without a valid license . If you do , you risk arrest , fine or both . Occasionally , an exception can be made in special circumstances when a `` hardship '' situation exists . It may involve a sick relative or possibly a scenario where you are given limited privileges to drive to work or school . An SR-22 Bond is frequently utilized in circumstances where a license has been suspended , or it is a condition of reinstating the license . Each state is different . And in these situations , you would have to obtain car insurance coverage that equals at least the state minimum liability limit . In many states , the minimum required liability limit is $ 25,000 per person , $ 50,000 per occurrence and an additional $ 25,000 of property damage . However , some state have higher limits while other states have lower limits or are `` no-fault '' states . IMPORTANT : The answer to this question was provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's premier car insurance experts with more than 34 years of experience . Harris manages several top-rated websites , including carinsurancezoom.org , which provides the lowest auto insurance rates to consumers from the largest carriers . Our clients receive unbiased service and advice at any time .
If you are getting the insurance to be able to get your license re-instated then it may be possible to secure auto insurance with a suspended license . Normally in this type of situation you would also require an SR-22 . If you are not getting your license re-instated at the time you are looking for the insurance coverage then I would you would not be able to secure coverage .
Yes , you can . A couple things though - If you are the owner of the vehicle and do n't have a license -LRB- maybe it 's suspended or maybe you are no longer allowed to drive due to medical conditions -RRB- you can purchase insurance and be named as the Insured . However , you must also assign a licensed driver to the vehicle and you , yourself , must be listed as an Excluded Driver . If you have an out-of-state license , you can get Pennsylvania insurance , however you will have 30 days -LRB- some companies offer 60 days -RRB- to convert your license into a PA license , otherwise the company has the right to cancel your policy . If you need further help obtaining PA Auto insurance , please contact me : WEBSITELINK or call/text : 570.294.4140
Yes , under certain circumstances you can purchase an auto policy without having a license . It is going to depend on several factors . Some companies will allow another licensed driver to be first named insured on an auto policy for a vehicle that you own . A comprehensive only policy may be an option as well . This will cover the vehicle for physical damage other than collision while it is stored . There is no liability coverage afforded with this sort of policy . If your license is suspended , I am aware of one company that will write a policy in your name . They then stipulate that your license be in good standing within 30 days of policy inception . Remember , companies offer different coverage and must operate under different rules from state to state . Talking to a broker is most likely your best bet . Good luck !
That is a great question ! You are in a tough place . Most insurance companies are going to be very hesitant to insure you while your license is suspended , and depending upon the reason why it is suspended , insuring you at all . You may be able to find a company that will write you a provisional or probationary policy that will be dependent upon you completing the requirements of the suspension , but I can not warn you strongly enough about the incredibly bad decision it would be should you choose to drive either on your suspended license , or without insurance . Please do n't . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Probably yes , but plan that you wo n't be paying the best rates . There is one catch to consider as well , however . If along with the DUI , your License has been suspended , then obtaining insurance with a suspended license will be tough . If that is the situation , you will probably have to wait until your license is reinstated before getting insurance .
It is possible to get auto insurance coverage if your license is suspended if you are in the process of getting your license re-instated and need to show proof of insurance to get your license re-instated otherwise I do n't believe that you will be able to secure coverage as you are not able to legally drive . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
In order to obtain insurance on a suspended license you must have the ability to regain your license by obtaining insurance . The insurance carrier will issue you in most cases an SR-22 which will notify the DMV you have insurance therebyenablingyou regain your license . Otherwise you can not obtain insurance if yourlicenseis going to remain suspended .
This may vary greatly from state to state , however in PA you can purchase coverage through at least one carrier that I am aware of with a suspended license . They require evidence that the license has been reinstated within 30 days of the effective date . This does not address the legality of driving on a suspended license however . You may also want a comprehensive only policy which covers the vehicle for perils other than collisions .
end question
