start question
medicare-insurance
How To Switch From Medicare To Medicaid ?
Medicare is administred by the federal government wheras Medicaid is administered by your State . You must go to the county office that processes request for medicaid and low income subsidy to apply for medicaid . Typically you would retain Medicare as primary carrier and if you are approved for Medicaid it becomes secondary and pays the copays and deductibles
Medicare Part D Drug Plans can generally only be switched during open enrollment -LRB- Oct 7th - Dec 15th -RRB- . The new plan would become effective Jan 1st 2015 . However , there are SEP 's -LRB- Special Enrollment Periods -RRB- , in which you can make a switch outside of open enrollment . Here are some examples of SEP 's ... You move outside your current plan 's service area , you become eligible for medicaid or a low income subsidy , you have Medicare AND Medicaid -LRB- Medi-Medi -RRB- .
If you are new to Medicare you can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan three months before - the month of - or 3 months after you turn 65 or qualify for Medicare . Otherwise you can only switch during the annual Open Enrollment Period from October 7th thru December 15th . If you have both Medicaid and Medicare or you are getting Extra Help thru Low Income Subsidy you can switch any time .
This is a common question most people have and the answer is yes , you can switch your insurance at any time . There is no mandate which states that you can not switch your insurance but the question is should you switch your insurance ? There are several things you want to consider before switching your auto insurance . The most common reason people switch their insurance is because of price . You will find that most states file insurance rates in January and June . So keep in mind depending on when you decide to switch your policy you could be hitting a price increase or decrease depending on what the state has filed . Switching your insurance once or even several times could actually hurt you . Companies are beginning to offer discounts such as loyalty discounts which dont kick in until you have been with them for so many years . Even though you may be saving $ 50 - $ 100 switching to another carrier you could be losing a lot more than that by not staying with your current insurance company . You may find loyalty discounts to range from 5 % -20 % depending on the company which could save you hundreds of dollars . But every situation is different so be sure to consider when your switching your insurance and what discounts you may or may not be losing .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
You are allowed to switch from a Medicare Advantage plan under certain conditions . If you are 65 or older and have been on Medicare Part B for less than 6 months you can switch to original Medicare and a Medigap . If you are in your Advantage trial right period , you can switch to Medigap . If you can pass underwriting requirements , you can switch to Medigap .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
For a person in the individual health insurance market after January 1 , 2014 you can switch your health insurance in a limited number of circumstances under the requirements of the Affordabel Care Act . 1 -RRB- During the open enrollment period , which ended on March 31st , 2014 . The next open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 for an effective date of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . 2 -RRB- Having a change of life status event . There are several things that can occur in your work or personal life that would allow you to enroll or change carriers outside of the newly established open enrollment periods . Some examples are ; - Loss of employer based coverage due to termination of employment or reduction in hours . - COBRA expiration : your COBRA or state continuation of coverage period expires - Loss of a Government Sponsored Plan - loss of eligibility for Medicaid , CHIP , Medicare , TRICARE , Veterans programs , Peace Corps programs - Loss of Minimum Essential Coverage - loss of an existing policy with Minimum Essential Benefits such as ; a Student Health Insurance plan or State High Risk Pool coverage - Birth , Adoption , Foster Care or Legal Guardianship - Marriage - No longer being an eligible dependent ; loss of employer sponsored or individual coverage because you are no longer eligible as a dependent . Generally this would mean you have turned age 26 . - Divorce from a policyholder - Termination of a pre-ACA individual plan during 2014 -LRB- this does not apply to short term major medical insurance plans -RRB- - Moving : you move out of state , or to a new area that offers different plan options or is outside of an HMO plan 's service area - Returning from active military service - Being released from jail - Newly eligible or ineligible for exchange subsidies or premium tax credit or cost-sharing reductions . This would mean a change in income levels have either now qualified you for subsidies you did not previously qualify for or have disqualified you for subsidies that you previously qualified for . - A material violation by the health plan : the health plan you enrolled in violates a material provision of its contract This pretty well covers the situations in which an individual can switch their health insurance under the conditions of the Affordable Care Act .
If you are currently in a Medicare Advantage Plan and want to switch back to original Medicare you may do so during the Annual Election Period with an effective date of January 1 . The Annual Election Period is from October 15th thru December 7th each year . You may also have a Special Election Period should you move out of your plans service area , your plan is discontinued , or if you qualify for Medicaid or Low Income Subsidy .
Yes , each year Medicare Advantage has a Annual Enrollment Period typically from October 15 - December 7th that you can switch plans . You can also leave the Medicare Advantage plan and enroll in a Medicare Supplement plan . Many people are switching from a Medicare Advantage plan to a Medicare Supplement plan because of all the changes that keep happening to the Medicare Advantage plans .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can switch your auto policy at any time . The most popular motivation to switch insurance carriers is price . People are looking for the best price for there insurance all the time . Other reasons to switch would be a new car purchase or moving to a new state . Switching carriers is easy and there are many to choose from . Shopping your auto insurance around is a great idea to compare prices . Using and agent can help you find insurance carriers that you normally would not have access to but going direct to and insurer online is also beneficial cutting out a middle man and getting quotes instantly . Be sure to check the term dates , is it six months or a year policy ? This can effect the way you compare the premiums . You will want to match your old coverage with your new quotes . Make sure the coverages are the same or similar this can prevent a coverage gap where you thought you had coverage . If you new vehicle is n't so new any more you may want to lower the amount of coverage on a particular vehicle . This can help lower your premium on the new policy or you can amend you current one . So while you can switch you insurer at any time do your research and make sure that it works in your favor .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
There is no fee that I am aware of to switch from one insurance company to another . The only reason that I am aware of that you want to switch insurance companies is lower cost . If there is a fee involved then you probably will not switch insurance companies . There is no fee to my knowledge to switch
In most circumstances it probably doesnt make any difference when you switch auto policies . Cancellations are treated on a pro-rata basis by many insurance companies . Doing a switch at renewal might be easiest , though . When considering a switch there are two things to consider . The first is the effect dropping coverage with one company might have on the premiums of other insurance policies that might have been bundled . The second is that switching frequently to save a few dollars does not allow you to develop any relationship with the agent , who might be your best friend at the time of a claim .
Medicaid does n't actually `` take '' your life insurance . You just ca n't qualify for Medicaid assistance if you have more countable assets than Medicaid allows . In most states $ 2,000 is the total allowed to qualify for Medicaid assistance . Checking and savings accounts , retirement money , cash value of life insurance , etc. all count against you when qualifying for Medicaid . Many people will cash surrender their life insurance to qualify for Medicaid . You can also irrevocably assign it to your funeral home and it will be exempt but must be all used for funeral expenses if you do that . An actual funeral preplan life insurance policy that you purchase from a funeral home is always exempt from Medicaid .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
You can switch health insurance pans while pregnant , but make sure to do your due diligence first . If you are increasing benefits and lowering maternity out-of-pocket costs then switching would be a great idea . On the other side of that argument , if you 're happy with your current plan and benefits you may find staying where you are until the baby is born serves you better . In the new arena of health reform and individual health insurance you can only switch during open enrollment or if you qualify for a special enrollment due to a life changing event . It 's best -LRB- pregnant or not -RRB- to find the right program and stick with it throughout the year to avoid headaches . For more information on how maternity is covered under Obamacare plans please visit www.clminsure.com
You can switch your Medicare Supplement anytime you want to as long as you can pass medical underwriting . If you have any serious pre-existing health conditions you may not be able to switch to another company . If you can qualify with a new company you and your wife will probably be able to save a lot of money and still receive good coverage for the gaps in your Original Medicare Part A and Part B coverage . If you currently have a Plan F consider switching to a Plan G or Plan N.
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Whole Life Insurance Not Guarantee ?
Participating whole life can not guarantee policy dividends . Its relatively high premium is designed to be paid for life -LRB- in most cases , earlier in others -RRB- and is required to be paid each year . You may not skip a premium . Dividends are never guaranteed . Dividends are a return of premium . They can stay in the policy by buying paid up additional life insurance . Such projected cash value from dividends will appear on illustrations as non guaranteed cash values . The basic cash values in the policy are guaranteed .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
Whole life insurance is for a very special kind of person . First of all , you are someone who sees the need for life insurance protection on a lifelong basis . Not just to cover the mortgage , not just to protect your family , not just as a supplement for your retirement . You face the fact that as life goes on , your need for life insurance changes , but for many people , the need is always there . And it could be for you . You know that if you bought term insurance , odds are you 'd end up buying another policy anyway , after that one renews . At a higher price . And hopefully youre insurable . Might as well lock in to guaranteed rates on a permanent basis . This brings up the second point . You are a guarantee-oriented type of person . You realize that life insurance is the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it has to be strong . Reliable . You do n't want too many variables in this product because , if you have a shaky foundation , your whole portfolio could crumble . Therefore , you want a guarantee on the premium , and you want a guarantee on the death benefit . You are also someone who appreciates the added benefit of cash value inside whole life insurance . For many people , whole life insurance is the guaranteed portion of their asset portfolio . No other product gives better guarantees -LRB- go ahead and check out the interest rates on guaranteed products out there . Then compare them to the guarantees whole life gives you . -RRB- On top of that , with a top-flight company , the dividends - the non-guaranteed portion of the cash build up - can be pretty rich . With a little strategic thinking , those dividends can enhance the value of that product . They can be used to offset the cost . They can be used to enhance the survivor benefit . They can be used to put cash in your pocket . They can be used to offset the cost of another policy . Lastly , whole life insurance is for disciplined people . In order to receive all the benefits named above , you need to stick to the payment schedule . It 's a fixed-premium product and will not tolerate underfunding , or over funding , or skipping payments . If you realize the bang for the buck you can get with whole life insurance , and have the discipline to stick to a premium payment schedule , then you 'll be glad you bought this policy .
Yes . Whole life is a permanent life insurance . The premium and the death benefit can be guaranteed for your entire lifetime . So can the cash value . This makes the product an extremely competitive cash accumulation vehicle for the conservative part of your portfolio . And why would you want the premium and the death benefit to be permanently guaranteed ? Well , imagine yourself buying term insurance and then outliving the policy . Now you need to buy another one . And youre older , so the price is automatically higher . And what if you unfortunately have a serious medical condition ? The price could be even higher . Worse , you may not qualify for coverage at all ! Permanent insurance means you permanently dont have to worry about qualifying for coverage . Whole life does that very well . But remember this : these guarantees come at a big cost . Especially the guaranteed cash value . What if you like the idea of permanent guarantees , but want to spend less on the coverage ? You do have an option : guaranteed universal life insurance . You can get the premium and the death benefit guaranteed for your lifetime at least until age 121 :-RRB- . You just wont have any cash guaranteed to grow inside the policy . Guaranteed universal life is also permanent insurance . Its a cheaper version of whole life , without the cash . Kind of like permanent term insurance .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
I am going to keep this simple . Let 's start with Term Life . Term Life Insurance covers you for the term you selected . The common term periods are 10-15-20-30 years . The premiums are usually guaranteed for the entire period of time . If you find a company that does not provide this guarantee , then I would shop around . Talk to your agent . After the term , the policy goes into what is referred to as annual renewable which can give you continued coverage however the rates are no longer guaranteed . Whole Life Insurance is permanent insurance designed to provide death benefit coverage until you die , your entire life , whether that is tomorrow or at age 105 . Not all companies are the same so be sure to do some homework . Whole Life Insurance is the oldest type of Life Insurance available and is usually the most expensive . Whole Life guarantees the premium you pay as well as the cash value you will have at a given time . Whole Life -LRB- WL -RRB- , a true WL policy pays dividends which can go back into the policy for more death benefit & cash value are pay you direct . There are usually several add-on 's or riders you can add to the policy to increase your coverage , add a child or spouse and on . Depending on what you are trying to achieve with the Life Insurance , both Term Life & Whole Life may be the answer . I would recommend talking to your agent/broker to help you decide how each of these will fit .
Life Insurance has both Guaranteed and non-Guaranteed components . Most term life insurance policies are guaranteed for the term which you purchase . Keep in mind not all term policies are guaranteed for the entire term . Example , you can get a 20 year term with a 10 year guarantee that the premiums will not increase . Be sure to read your policy before excepting it so you understand what the guarantee is . Permanent Insurance is built a bit differently . You can get a permanent life insurance policy which is guaranteed to age 120 . Keep in mind however , if the premium payment is not paid on time the guarantee could be at risk . Permanent policies , Universal Life & Whole Life both have guaranteed features as well as with Whole Life , you can get a Guaranteed Cash Value . Reach out to your broker/agent to look at all your options .
The purpose of whole life insurance is to provide guarantees . You know what ? It does a very good job at this . Guarantees are a godsend in a financial world in which cycles and ups and downs and cost increases are the norm . Its nice to have a product you can truly count on . These guarantees come in three delicious flavors : Flavor number one : a guaranteed premium . As you get older , your price stays the same . As it costs more for the company to insure you , your price stays the same . If the company has a bad investment year , or two , or three , your price stays the same . Thats good . But theres more . Flavor number two : a guaranteed death benefit . You see all those variables mentioned in number one above that could affect your price but dont ? They could also affect your death benefit . But they dont . Neither your age , nor their increasing cost , nor their poor investment performance can reduce the benefit you were leaving to your heirs . That is really good . But we have one last delicious flavor : Flavor number three : a guaranteed cash accumulation . Do yourself a favor and compare the guaranteed growth of cash inside a good whole life contract with other so-called guaranteed investments out there . You will notice that whole life basically beats the pants off the competition in this regard . Of course , you always have to be wise about taking money out of life insurance , and make sure you dont reduce your death benefit to an undesirable amount . But given that , whole life can make a real valuable contribution to the conservative portion of your financial portfolio .
Guaranteed premium life insurance is a life insurance policy in which you get a contractual guarantee that the premium will not change . It will not increase , and it will not decrease . That is a very good deal . You do not want to have to worry about your premium changing . This product is , after all , supposed to be the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it should be dependable . Virtually all life insurance products available now provide premium guarantees . Its really just a question of how long the guarantee will last . Term insurance gives you guarantees for a specified amount of time . Could be 10 years , 15 , 20 , 30 , etc. . After that , watch out . The price could go skyhigh . Universal life could also give you guarantees for a specified amount of time . The interesting thing about this product is that since it has a flexible premium , you can determine how long you want that guarantee . It could last from a few years , to your lifetime . You can kind of make it function as permanent term insurance . No guaranteed cash accumulation , but a lifetime guarantee on the premium . And on the death benefit , by the way . Whole life typically comes with a lifetime guarantee on the premium . Thats the way the product is designed . I think you can appreciate that the longer you want the guarantee , the higher will be the premium . You get what you pay for . There you go . What else do you need to know ?
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
There are a lot of answers here which are all correct so I will take a little different approach . Asking the question When does Whole Life make sense is really talking about your situation . If you are looking to protect your family while the children are at home , then Whole Life may not be the best solution or if you have a loan such as your mortgage , Whole Life may not makes sense . However , if you are looking for Lifetime Coverage with not only a death benefit guarantee , because I can give you a death benefit guarantee for a lot less , but a guaranteed cash value to use as necessary in the future years . Whole Life is also used in some type of plans for businesses which is required to be fully guaranteed as well .
Yes , typically from a premium stand point term life is much cheaper than whole life . The reason is term life insurance has a shelf life or expiration date . You are essentially `` renting '' the coverage . The premium is guaranteed level for a certain period of time such as 10-20-30 years and then it will either expire or have steep premium increases . Whole life premiums are plans designed to be level for your whole life . You will see whole life plans guaranteed to ages 90-95-105-121-150 . Naturally to insure that type of guarantee the premiums will be much more expensive than term life rates . Also , whole life insurance has a value add of cash value that accumulates that can be used for things like retirement , college funds or an unexpected critical illness . Term life is just a death benefit .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
Heres a simple model for you . I am sure you know about term insurance . This is a product designed to give you the absolutely lowest premium for a certain amount of time . The premium and death benefit could be guaranteed from 10 to 30 years . No cash will be accumulated for your use . -LRB- Of course , that is one big reason why the premium is so low -RRB- . The problem we all face with term insurance is that once the guarantee period is over , the price typically skyrockets . I have actually see the premium increase tenfold at the time of renewal ! Now lets suppose that you could have something that would act like permanent term insurance . The premium would be as low as can possibly be . No cash would be accumulated . But the price would never go up . You would have , in essence , a lifetime guarantee . That , my friend , is called guaranteed universal life insurance . Whole life insurance is very similar . Guaranteed premium . Guaranteed death benefit . Lifelong coverage . The big difference is that whole life insurance also emphasizes cash accumulation . It provides very strong guarantees on the cash . So it costs a lot more than guaranteed universal life insurance . It should be noted that providing a lifetime guarantee is only one of a variety of uses for universal life insurance . It is a flexible product and can be designed to accumulate cash as well . It can also be designed to accommodate a variety of premium payments . But when the financial planning objective is to secure a lifetime coverage at the lowest possible guaranteed cost , there is no better product .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
When does whole life make sense ? While I would like to say `` anytime '' , I ca n't . Whole life makes sense when it has time to work . 20 + years and a whole life is an excellent product , probably the best you can do long term . However , when you have limited your time by waiting till later in life to purchase life insurance , the cost of whole life can be prohibitive . Then a GUL -LRB- guaranteed universal life -RRB- starts to make more sense as it can provide lifetime protection at a set stable cost that would be less than Whole life . Whole life still could be a possibility , but usually the cost is up there .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Does Copay Mean In Health Insurance ?
A copay is a set amount of the bill you are responsible for . For example , if your policy has a $ 20 copay for doctors visit , and your doctor charges $ 100 per visit , your company pays $ 80 and you pay $ 20 . If your doctor charges $ 150 , you still only pay $ 20 Coinsurance is a percentage of the bill you may be responsible for . If you have a plan with 80/20 coinsurance and you have a $ 10,000 hospital bill , you will be responsible for $ 2000 -LRB- 20 % -RRB- and your company pays the balance
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Cymbalta will have different costs with each Part D RX plan or the Rx plans built inherently into Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C plans -RRB- . Each plan has a formulary which tiers the drugs and then ties each tier to a copay . You will not find Cymbalta in a lower copay tier with most carriers as they will all have it listed as a tier 3 or tier 4 medication . There are some plans that have lower copays associated with tier 3 however . Most companies charge a $ 45 to $ 50 copay for a one month supply of a tier 3 drug . There are some plans that have a $ 18 to $ 25 copay for tier three which could save you some money . The last thing to keep in mind is regardless of the copay amount , a drug like Cymbalta is going to push you into the Part D coverage gap `` donut hole '' much faster than a lower cost generic would do .
As + Larry Gilmore and + Tony Canas have indicated , the deductible is an amount you must pay before accessing the major medical portion of your health insurance plan . Some health insurance plans have copay 's for items such as doctor and Rx while others are simple catastrophic plans where you are responsible for paying all illness and accident related claims before the plan pays anything . If your plan has doc & Rx copay 's you generally do not have to meet the deductible before the plan pays . Regardless of whether your plan has copay 's or not , keep in mind you are not paying the `` full retail '' price of care when you are in the deductible phase . If you are using par -LRB- network -RRB- providers , you are only paying the negotiated rate for your care . Also some plans have zero coinsurance after the deductible , meaning the carrier pays 100 % of your approved major medical related claims when using par providers .
Prescriptions are covered under a Part D plan -LRB- prescription drug plan -RRB- or Part C plan -LRB- medicare advantage plan -RRB- . Every plan has a unique formulary that determines what tier each medication is categorized as or if it is even covered by the plan . Typically brand drugs are a tier 3 or higher and have a higher copay when filled at your in-network pharmacy . Some brand drugs have a generic alternative which puts them at a tier 1 or tier 2 which usually has a lower copay . Some plans provide for $ 0 copay for generics or at least a discount on your copays if you use a mail order pharmacy and may allow you to receive up to a 90 day supply of your medications . Be sure to read about any applicable prescription deductibles and coverage gaps/catastrophic gaps -LRB- commonly called ` the donut hole ' -RRB- that may apply to these plans as that may cause the copays to change .
Excellent question ! You essentially have 3 main variations on the theme when purchasing ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance ; 1 -RRB- Conventional plan designs with office visit & prescription copays and lower deductibles -LRB- pretty pricey these days -RRB- 2 -RRB- High deductible health insurance plans designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- or a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- - becoming more common . 3 -RRB- Plans that fall in between , here you may see a plan with office visit copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , plans with prescription copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , or plans with more moderate deductible levels with all services subject to the plan 's deductible and co-insurance requirements but that also do n't meet the IRS requirements for being an HSA eligible plan . Simple , right ? First , determine if the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use are in-network providers for the plan you are interested in . Second , review you health and your history of health care consumption . Your needs and usage at 27 will probably be much different than when you are 47 . Try to pick a plan that you believe will meet your needs in the coming year at the best value . Determine if the plan you are interested in allows for direct access to specialists or whether it requires you to be referred out by your primary care physician first . Neither approach is bad but you should understand how you are supposed to access care in order to maximize your benefits and minimize your costs . Ask what your coverage is when you are outside of your immediate area . Increasingly you may find that you only have emergency care outside of a plan 's `` service area '' or perhaps no coverage at all . Do you have special needs ? A chronic illness or injury that requires ongoing treatment or expensive prescription medication requires extra homework . For example , some health plan 's pharmacy benefits cover HIV/AIDS medications at the lowest level -LRB- to them , highest for you -RRB- possible . Finally , compare monthly premiums . The lowest monthly cost , while always attractive , many not really be the lowest annual cost for you once you factor in some or all of the issues I have pointed out above . It may be worth another $ 50 a month in premiums to have a prescription copay instead of a deductible of up to $ 6300 to meet before your expensive medication is covered .
Private health insurance plans do indeed cover GP -LRB- General Practitioner -RRB- office visits . Some health insurance plans have in network copay 's for doctor visits -LRB- and higher copay 's for out of network visits -RRB- . If your plan does not have a doctor visit copay you will pay the negotiated rate when you use a network doctor . Your out of pocket cost for using a non-network doctor will be considerably higher .
You asked a very detailed and complicated question . Your first cost is , if you are a service connected veteran , was the days and months you spent in that `` foxhole '' or some distant country that separated you from your family and friends . However , you do not have to be `` service connected '' in order to obtain treatment by the VA. . You can go through a `` annual means '' testing at VA where you are required to provide `` financial details '' including if you do have health insurance . Then you can also be classified as a `` hardship case '' by disclosing financial information and the type of treatment you need . Generally your copays are $ 8 for medication ; outpatient copays are $ 15 for non = specialist and $ 50 for specialist . If you have to be admitted , your copay is the current year Medicare deductible which was $ 840 in 2003 and has been indexing each year and will be $ 2016 in 2014
HDHP means high deductible health plan . The typical plan design does not have copay 's for doctor visits or prescription drugs . Policyholders that use par -LRB- network -RRB- providers pay the pre-negotiated rate for all covered services . The amounts paid for covered medical services accrue towards the deductible . HDHP policies are a simple , easy to understand concept . Unlike copay plans , there are no `` moving parts '' to the HDHP . Once the deductible is satisfied , all covered charges for the balance of the year are paid by the carrier -LRB- subject to coinsurance provisions -RRB- . Most plans offer 100 % coinsurance above the deductible but it is not unusual to see plans with 80 % , 70 % or 50 % coinsurance . The HDHP design is a requirement for those who want an HSA -LRB- health savings account -RRB- but not all HDHP 's are HSA compliant . Policyholders looking for good value and minimal risk exposure for catastrophic claims will choose the HDHP .
Medicare coverage for Nursing Home is extremely limited . You must be admitted to the hospital for at least three days not counting day of discharge , you must need skilled care , and the reason for your care must be related to the reason for your hospital stay . Medicare will pay all of the first 20 days in a Skilled Nursing Facility . Days 21 through 100 you will have a copay . This year that copay is $ 148 per day . Medicare does not pay for custodial care , which means that unless there is the ability for the persons health to improve by receiving skilled care , Medicare will not pay .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
It ultimately comes down to what 's right for you . HMOs -LRB- Health Maintenance Organizations -RRB- and PPOs -LRB- Preferred Provider Organizations -RRB- each have their benefits and everyone has their own preferences and coverage benefit desires and premium tolerance . Cost is a big factor for just about everyone so it 's important to look at what each type offers and what 's available in your area . With an HMO plan , you designate a doctor to be your primary care physician -LRB- PCP -RRB- . All of your health care services are coordinated through your PCP . That means that you need a referral before you can see a specialist or other health care provider -LRB- except in an emergency -RRB- . The doctors you visit must be in network - out-of-network doctors typically are n't covered . PPO plans offer more flexibility . You 're not required to designate a PCP and you can go see a specialist without a referral - inside or outside of your network.Staying inside your network means smaller copays and full coverage . If you see a physician outside of your network , you may have a higher out-of-pocket share , and not all services may be covered . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
Medicare Advantage plans are indeed like traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
There is no `` best '' plan . The plan that fits your needs and budget is the one that is best for you . Medicare Advantage plans are indeed like traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
Medicare Advantage plans range in premium from $ 0 to less than $ 100 per month in most areas . Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
There is no `` best '' Medicare Advantage plan . Benefits and premiums vary by zip code and from year to year . The `` best '' plan is the one that fits your needs and budget . Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan
There is no `` best '' Medicare Advantage plan . Benefits and premiums vary by zip code and from year to year . The `` best '' plan is the one that fits your needs and budget . Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
There is no `` best '' Advantage plan . The one that fits your needs and budget is the best for you . Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
Health insurance has a major impact on the economic forces of supply and demand . Even more so with the low deductible copay plans that are popular . Consumers are isolated from the true cost of health care when all they know is $ 20 copay 's . On average , consumers pay about 12 % of the total cost of their health care , the rest is paid by insurance carriers . This impacts utilization which not only drives up the cost of health care but the cost of health insurance as well .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Home Insurance A Legal Requirement ?
Not in most states . The bank will require it in most cases however to protect themselves if you carry a mortgage on the property . If you do not have a mortgage and want to assume the risk , not only of fixing or replacing your home in the event of a loss but also the risk of law suit , then you do not have to carry homeowners insurance . Think hard about it , is it really worth the risk ?
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
No it is not a legal requirement . Many lenders however will require mortgage life insurance to protect themselves . Also , there have been cases where a judge has required a divorced spouse to carry life insurance to cover a mortgage or protect minor children although these cases would depend on the situation . As a general rule however , you are not legally required to carry mortgage insurance .
Entering business without appropriate liability insurance can result in financial consequences that will dwarf the premium that would be required to have coverage . Just because he is 16 years old will not relieve him of the financial responsibility in the event of an occurrence where someone is injured or property is damaged . I do n't buy into the notion that insurance gives a business credibility but I do agree that it is the best single method of protecting assets and the future ability to earn a living . At 16 years old , another issue develops and that is whether or not he meets legal requirements to start or open a business or can entered into contracts . And , because your son is not of a legal age , will his parents or legal guardian be responsible for any losses that occur in the operation of the business ? If a case can be made for the inclusion of parents or guardians into a claim or lawsuit , the stakes just went up dramatically . So , insurance is a minimum necessity . One other thought . Insurance carriers may not insure your son because of his age , but they are more likely to concern themselves with the combination of his age and lack of business experience . Many carriers having the best rates have the requirement of at least a few years of experience . While coverage may be available in a specialty insurance marketplace , our best carriers will generally have issues with a 16 year old new business customer first entering and insuring a business . Once again , a parent might be necessary to make the business insurance happen . But back to your question : Absolutely a yes on the need for insurance . Good luck .
-- > Normal 0 Basic homeowners policies provide coverage in three general areas . They agree to indemnify you for the cost to repair or replace your home or your personal property should it be damaged or destroyed . They agree to indemnify you for your increased expenses should your home be damaged or destroyed and you are required to live somewhere else while your home is being repaired . They agree to provide you a legal defense and pay some or all of certain civil judgments should something you do or fail to do injure or damage someone . Obviously each area has its own limitations which are outlined in 40-50 pages of words some of which are subject to legal interpretations but for the most part this is the type of coverage you will find in most homeowners ' policies .
If you have term life insurance it has no cash value . That would make the answer very simple . No one can take that from you . So your life insurance would remain secure while in a nursing home , if it is term insurance , so long as you can find a way to continue to pay the premiums . The more interesting question is what if you have permanent or cash value life insurance ? These policies build up value , and can actually be sold , or surrendered for cash . A nursing home might want that money . Depending on the nursing home and their contract with you , they might require you to pay them from such proceeds , but there is no legal requirement that you do so for them , and you can , of course , go to a different nursing home . The harder question is what if you have no or little other assets , and are planning to enter a government assisted facility ? Medicare will NOT pay for long term care , but MediCal will , but you will need to spend down your assets . So the question arises , if you are required to spend down your assets , will you have to sell the life insurance policy -LRB- meaning surrender its cash value -RRB- in order to stay in a MediCal nursing home . The answer to that very narrow specific question can change from time to time , as the MediCal rules change . But know that if you wish to claim impoverishment , and you retain ownership of a substantial cash value asset , you should expect the government to demand that you sell it and use the proceeds to pay for your care . Tread carefully . Thank you . GARY LANE .
life insurance claims are usually filed by the immediate family members , or benificiaries who are of legal age . When the policy is sold a folder is given along . with papers in order to identify where the policy information is kept . Depending . on the agent and company . Life policies are equivalent to wills are very involved in the estate . If you dealt with a good agent then you would have been assisted with this form of estate planning . The policy is mentioned in the will or there is a known location as to where the policy is kept . The claimants must be the beneficiaries of legal age . If the beneficiaries are under the legal age are named then the probate will handle the claim.until they become legal . It is always best to name a beneficiary of legal age if you have younger children for this reason . . Beneficiaries can be changed anytime during the policy and only by policy owner .
There are a few types of coverage to consider . First of course is a Homeowners ' Insurance Policy . This will be required by your mortgage company and it provides broad loss coverage on your new home and your personal belongings as well as liability protection for you and your family in the event you happen to be legally responsible for someone 's injury or damage to their property . Next , and this may be required depending upon the location of your home , is Flood Insurance . Flood damage is NEVER covered under a homeowners ' policy so if required , it means you are located in a higher risk flood zone . If not required it is still a good idea to consider . Finally , look into Life Insurance to protect your family in the event you die before your mortgage is paid off .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Renters insurance is not required by law in California . I doubt that it is required in any state . That it is not required doesnt make it any less important . As a tenant you have legal liability for everything that takes place at the rented place . If someone is injured , you can be sued . Your personal property is not the responsibility of the landlord , it is yours . If there is a fire , your property can be reduced to smoke and no one is legally responsible to pay you for the loss . These are the reasons it just makes good sense to have a renters policy
Homeowners insurance is usually required by the mortage company and therefore from that perspective home owners is required . Even if you do not have a mortage and someone is injured on your property are you sure you intend to make your personal assets subject to a legal cliam ? What if someone breaks into your home and steals all your prized possesions ? What is a `` thunder storm '' causes lightning to strike your home and the electrical circuitry rendered useless ?
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
South Carolina Homeowners Insurance is similar to home insurance in any other State . You will need to have a good insurance policy to cover your home , personal belongings and personal liability coverage to protect you from legal action due to negligence . The home -LRB- dwelling -RRB- should be covered for the value to reconstruct the home following a total loss . Most insurance companies will simply ask you a few characteristic questions about your home and calculated the estimated reconstruction value of the home . Please note , the reconstruction value of the home is not relative to the current market sales price of the property which could fluctuate in differing market conditions and also includes the value of the land -LRB- which remains uninsured -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Life insurance is not essential in terms of being mandated . E.g. Auto insurance is legally required in order to drive a car . Life insurance is not legally required in order to live . Life insurance is essential to most people , however , in terms of being necessary . The people who it is necessary to are not the person being insured . They are those who are left behind .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
-- > Normal 0 Id like to expand a little on this question , sure your mortgage lender may require you to have some form of insurance coverage on your home but just good judgment would suggest you not be without this type of coverage . Homeowners policies provide coverage in four principal areas ; Depending on the type of coverage you purchase , the policy most often would reimburse you should your home be damaged or destroyed . It will often reimburse you should any of your personal property be damaged or destroyed -LRB- clothing , furniture and/or household items -RRB- . They can reimburse you for additional expenses you incur should your home be damaged and you are required to live in temporary quarters for a period of time while your home is being repaired . These policies may also pay for an attorney to represent you should someone other than a family member be injured while on your property and indemnify you if a civil court finds you responsible for injuring someone or damaging their property . Any responsible homeowner should consider securing this type of coverage . It beats digging into your savings after a storm , fire or after being served legal papers . And it beats waiting for the Red Cross to give you a shirt , a bed and a hot meal .
Homeowners Insurance can be cancelled at any time by the Insured . The Insured may be required to submit a signed request to cancel the policy ; it is important to purchase a new policy and make sure it is effective the same date as the cancellation of your old policy . All policies have a Standard Time of inception and expiration at : 12:01 a.m. . There is an online link available to obtain a quote and purchase Home Insurance directly online in multiple States . The link is : WEBSITELINK If the reason for changing carriers is due to an issue with an inspection which was conducted -LRB- interior or exterior -RRB- on your property , we must advise that all carriers are now inspecting risks which means you will most probably have the same issue with another carrier . On the other hand , an insurance carrier has legal restrictions regarding the cancellation of an insurance policy ; they may only cancel a policy for any underwriting reason during the first 60 days of a new insurance policy . They may cancel a policy at any time for non-payment of premium following the State requirement for legal notice .
First , I am not exactly sure what you mean by legal assistance , so I am going to answer the question I think you are asking . When you get car insurance you get coverage for injuring third parties , which is typically called bodily/physical injury coverage . Many times , this coverage includes defense costs in the event you get sued for injuring a third party . The limits of your legal defense costs can go one of two ways : either the defense limits are included within your limits or there is a separate limit for defense costs . There are advantages and disadvantages to either method . If the legal defense costs are included in your limits you will have defense costs until the insurance company pays out the limits of your insurance . If you have a separate limit then your legal defense ends when the attorneys fees use up that allocated amount . Either way you do n't have unlimited defense , but if it is a serious bodily injury you will lose the `` free '' attorney much quicker . I hope this helps !
The situation you describe will require legal assistance to unravel . I think that your state insurance commissioner will also want to know what happened . I believe that if the policy has been placed in force , it is in force until it is cancelled . I suspect that you did not receive good advice when the home office told you to make the premium deposit ; however , this is a serious legal issue .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Does Obamacare Mean For Nurses ?
Typically , nurses purchase their own health insurance -LRB- unless they work for a hospital or other large company -RRB- . Since rates are expected to increase -LRB- perhaps dramatically in some areas -RRB- , nurses will feel the brunt of higher prices . A new federal tax subsidy will help reduce rates for those that qualify . And of course , nurses , like everyone , must now buy health insurance . It 's the law .
What does obamacare mean for nurses ? From an health insurance point of view . the same for just about everyone . Note : my opinion here . Professionally , obamacare will mean a much harder job as I think hospitals will cut staff and pay . There will not be a bonanza of new jobs or money with Obamacare as the only way to get it to work is reduce costs and there will be downward pressure .
What does obamacare mean for nurses ? From an health insurance point of view . the same for just about everyone . Note : my opinion here . Professionally , obamacare will mean a much harder job as I think hospitals will cut staff and pay . There will not be a bonanza of new jobs or money with Obamacare as the only way to get it to work is reduce costs and there will be downward pressure .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
If you have term life insurance it has no cash value . That would make the answer very simple . No one can take that from you . So your life insurance would remain secure while in a nursing home , if it is term insurance , so long as you can find a way to continue to pay the premiums . The more interesting question is what if you have permanent or cash value life insurance ? These policies build up value , and can actually be sold , or surrendered for cash . A nursing home might want that money . Depending on the nursing home and their contract with you , they might require you to pay them from such proceeds , but there is no legal requirement that you do so for them , and you can , of course , go to a different nursing home . The harder question is what if you have no or little other assets , and are planning to enter a government assisted facility ? Medicare will NOT pay for long term care , but MediCal will , but you will need to spend down your assets . So the question arises , if you are required to spend down your assets , will you have to sell the life insurance policy -LRB- meaning surrender its cash value -RRB- in order to stay in a MediCal nursing home . The answer to that very narrow specific question can change from time to time , as the MediCal rules change . But know that if you wish to claim impoverishment , and you retain ownership of a substantial cash value asset , you should expect the government to demand that you sell it and use the proceeds to pay for your care . Tread carefully . Thank you . GARY LANE .
If it has not already , it eventually will unless there are further delays or changes to the Affordable Care Act . Granted , those who have plans that were in place before the passage of the law on March 23 , 2010 can technically keep these policies in effect . That assumes your insurance carrier does n't phase out such policies and that you make essentially no changes to the policy . You may recall there was quite a national uproar over this issue late in 2013 that prompted President Obama to kind of have to live up to his `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' promise so we have seen more renewal offers of existing pre-Obamacare policies since then in the individual and small group marketplaces . And this does kind of trap these policyholders . ObanaCare compliant policies are generally significantly more expensive than their pre-Obamacare counterparts . So , you can experience some pretty significant rate increases on your old policy in some cases and still be marginally better off financially than moving to an ObamaCare compliant policy . I am certainly seeing this scenario play out in some cases . For ObamaCare to have any vague chance of working financially they really need to pull as many people as possible into their pool . Continuing to allow the existence of non-compliant policies denies them this revenue stream and probably a healthier population that chooses to maintain such policies . So , regardless of the promises of politicians , consumers need to be vigilant if they have an old style policy that they want to keep . The pressure will continue to build to save you people who do n't know better from your `` trash '' policies as the administration referred to them and to move you into the glorious world of ObamaCare .
Medicare pays for the first 20 days of a * qualified stay in the nursing home , and then it will pay all but $ 152/day to day 100 . After day 100 , the only nursing home care that is paid is what would have been paid if the recipient is not in the nursing home . I.e. Drugs and durable medical equipment , doctor visits , hospital stays , and other qualified products and services . * To be a qualified stay , the patient must have been in the hospital for at least three days for the same condition for which they are going to the nursing home . The health condition must be medically determined to need skilled nursing care from a Medicare approved facility . Without these qualifiers , Medicare will not pay any part of the nursing home care , except that which they would have received if they not in a nursing home .
The PPACA or better known as Obamacare is a mandatory federal program where all Americans are to participate or pay a penalty . The program begins in 2014 . All Americans will participate in Obamacare , but not all will pay the full premium or may not pay at all based on means testing . The middle class may receive some credits to offset the premium , but for many low or no income Americans , theyll simply pay nothing . Keep in mind that almost half the country does n't pay federal taxes , so any short fall generated from Obamacare will fall to federal tax payers .
What does Obamacare mean ? Are you sure you want to ruin your day ? Sorry ... Just a little joke there . Obamacare is the new `` Affordable Care Act , '' that was designed to lower healthcare costs and health insurance rates . You were supposed to be able to keep your existing policy and save thousands of dollars per year in premiums . That 's what it was supposed to be . It is n't . So what is it ? In 2014 we 'll get a better idea of the effectiveness of the legislation . Americans will have to buy health insurance or pay a tax . Federal tax subsidies will help many consumers pay lower premiums . But many others will face skyrocketing prices . It should be very interesting .
Obviously that will depend upon who the next President is . Your question probably assumes a Republican President being elected and the current Republican control of the House and Senate continuing after the 2016 elections . A possible outcome that is a distinct possibility . Now , ask yourself , `` How many Federal laws have I seen totally repealed in my lifetime ? '' I think most people would be hard pressed to name any and this is because it is relatively rare . A new entitlement system that already has several million people involved in it has been created as has a new bureaucracy to administer it . These are hard to end . The next President will inherit these `` facts on the ground '' when they take office regardless of their political persuasion . Even a Republican seen as having a clear electoral mandate to end Obamacare will be faced with the daunting political , social and , unfortunately , racial challenges that would be associated with unwinding such an enormous program . A type of political courage that has not been demonstrated in Washington in quite some time would be required to push through a total repeal . And , then there are the uncomfortable questions that have to be faced . 1 -RRB- Do we truly want to go back to the way things were in health insurance before ObamaCare ? -LRB- for example , should pre-existing condition exclusions be allowed to return ? -RRB- and , 2 -RRB- If not , what would we keep and what would we remove from ObamaCare to `` fix '' it ? This is purely opinion , but , looking at the practical challenges involved and the fact that ObamaCare is already injected into the health insurance/healthcare system now , the path of least resistance will be the `` Fix It '' route . Whether it was a President Paul or Cruz -LRB- Trump might be another case altogether -RRB- I really ca n't see them announcing on TV that everyone 's subsidies were being ended immediately and that they would be seeing their health insurance rates increase by hundreds of dollars per month and `` good luck '' . It might not be political suicide but it would be one heck of a headache . Some sort of transitional approach coupled with new solutions would have to be devised to minimize further disruptions in people 's lives and to the healthcare/health care financing industries . So , as much as we may wish that ObamaCare had never arrived , it has . Being realistic , whether it is fixing it , replacing it or totally undoing it , none of those things will happen immediately and the most likely scenario is one where some aspects of the law are retained and others are jettisoned or modified over time . This means that the months and years ahead are almost guaranteed to be as chaotic and subject to rapid and repeated change as what we have experienced during the previous five years . Answer provided by Marlin McKelvy , Chartered Benefits Consultant and president of Consumer Directed Benefit Solutions insurance agency with over 30 years of employee benefits experience serving the insurance needs of businesses and individuals in Tennessee , Arkansas and Mississippi .
Yes , No and Maybe . Now , are we all clear on that ? The simple version of things is that failure to comply with the individual mandate will trigger a penalty for an adult of $ 95 or 1 % of Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- . And , if the average citizen knows anything at all about ObamaCare then this is probably the piece they know about . As with so many aspects of ObamaCare , when one gets down into the details the picture gets less clear . First , there were certain groups excluded from ObamaCare and the individual mandate from the law 's very beginning -LRB- members of certain faiths such as the Amish , people enrolled in health care sharing ministries and Native Americans are prominent examples -RRB- . You are also exempted from the individual mandate penalty if the lowest cost marketplace option in your area is more than 8 % of your family income or you fall below the tax filing threshold . As the law has continued to `` evolve '' there has been a new class of exemptions granted by the IRS for `` hardship '' exemptions . This IRS form provides 14 different hardship exemptions a taxpayer can claim to avoid paying the individual mandate penalty . Some are rather narrowly constructed and have an obvious logic to them , the exemption for being homeless for example . Others , are worded in ways that can leave a lot of room for creativity . Some of my favorite hardship exemptions are ; 1 -RRB- You received a shut off notice from your utility company . -LRB- So , do n't pay your gas bill for a couple of months , get a shutoff notice then pay your bill , and you qualify for a health penalty waiver - can anybody foresee lots of people having `` cash flow '' problems on their utility bills in the years to come ? -RRB- 2 -RRB- You experienced the death of a close family member . -LRB- Yep , that 's it . Does n't really define the time line , what `` experienced '' truly means , what does `` close '' mean and how far out on the family tree can you go and still say someone was a family member . The potential for creativity in this area is hilarious to anticipate . -RRB- 4 -RRB- Your individual plan is cancelled and you believe other marketplace plans are unaffordable . -LRB- When it comes to belief , do any of us really believe that health insurance is affordable ? What is my belief predicated on ? Will my belief be viewed differently if I am a Tea Party donor or a supporter of the Occupy movement ? -RRB- 5 -RRB- You experienced another hardship in obtaining health insurance . -LRB- I agree that brevity is the soul of wit but this may take things to the extreme . What 's a hardship to one person is an inconvenience to another . Dust off your creative writing skills , I can foresee lots of tales of woe about losing your dog of 15 years -LRB- hey , the dog meant more to me than some close relatives -RRB- , that you only have dial-up internet , why the mind runs wild with the possibilities ! So , will you be penalized on your 2014 taxes in 2015 if you do n't have acceptable health insurance . Technically , yes . In practical terms , many people will be able to claim an exemption and that will significantly dilute the anticipated revenue stream -LRB- and the government has already included individual mandate tax penalties in its cost projections for ObamaCare -RRB- from and the practical effect of the individual mandate on people 's behavior . In many ways you will have to be almost actively seeking out the opportunity to pay the tax penalty or be in that place in life where you are getting by financially without a health insurance payment and not much of anything that could smack of a hardship occurs in your life . For a lot of other people , some life circumstances during many years of their lives will let them take a pass on the penalty . You can bet the tax preparation services are going to be going great guns on this , they 've already started trying to help people enroll . It 's only logical to extend that to making sure every hardship their client is entitled to is reported .
Skilled Nursing Care is covered under Medicare Part A and can only follow at least a three day stay in a hospital . Skilled Nursing Care is rehab , the goal at a Skilled Nursing Facility is to get you better so you can come home . Medicare covers Skilled Nursing Care at 100 % for the first 20 days . If your doctor thinks you should stay longer than 20 days Medicare starts charging a co-pay of $ 157.50 per day for days 21-100 . Skilled Nursing Care should not be confused with Long Term Care because Medicare will only allow you to stay up to 100 days in a Skilled Nursing Facility . Be sure your Medicare Supplement policy covers the additional days -LRB- 21-100 -RRB- in a Skilled Nursing Facility .
When Obamcare was passed in March of 2010 , one of the key objectives that had to be met from a political standpoint was showing that its costs over the coming 10 years would be under $ 1 trillion dollars . This somewhat arbitrary number was picked to say that Obamacare would cost less than what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , this may have made for good political theatre but what it really had to so with healthcare and health insurance in practical terms always kind of eluded me . One of the ways that the democrat party made the numbers work -LRB- and I 'm just stating historical facts here , no Republicans ever voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act -RRB- was that they transferred $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over that 10 year period to fund ObamaCare . We will still be spending more on Medicare in the coming decade but the amount of available funding has certainly been sharply deflected downwards at a time when a record number of Americans will be in and entering the Medicare program . So , in this way , ObamaCare has shifted funds that would have otherwise gone towards Medicare to help paint a budget picture that allowed for the passage of the law . Of course , since then government estimates for the projected 10 year cost of Obamacare has gone far above the $ 1 trillion mark but , hey , they got the law passed and they did n't even really have to read it .
Despite assertions to the contrary , it is entirely possible that Obamacare -LRB- AKA the ACA -RRB- could be eliminated but Trump wo n't have the power to make that change by himself . Many point to the Supreme Court rulings as legitimacy but they were made on narrow points of law and the power of the purse will have be an effective means of gutting the law -LRB- if that is a course chosen -RRB- . More likely , the plan will be fundamentally altered . As a plan it has reached well past what most Americans consider reasonable and one of the undeniable aspects of Obamacare is the subsidy system which phases out over a period of several years . Once the subsidies die many of those who are receiving subsidized premiums will again find their insurance to be too expensive . Additionally , when the IRS begins assessing people penalties for failing to maintain coverage , attitudes will shift back towards a voluntary insurance programs . Frankly , the most logical outcome with Obamacare is significant changes to structure and subsidies and a relaxation of onerous and overbearing aspects of the law that politicians will have to consider to make it more universally acceptable among health care and the population . Maybe more importantly , some speculate that Obamacare is already in financial trouble but the real test is in seven or eight years when all the back end loading of losses will overwhelm the premiums and result in a political uproar when the actuaries insist on gigantic infusions of tax money to keep social medicine afloat .
Obamacare is national mandatory health insurance for all Americans . Presently the health care law does n't address long term care as does Medicaid . Individual long term care insurance is private insurance and at present is not directly effected by Obamacare . It is conceivable that Medicaid could be effected by Obamacare and may have future ramifications for long term care . It 's simply too early to assess the impact .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does Medicare Cover For Vision ?
Medicare Part B can provide coverage for some preventive and diagnostic eye exams for people at high-risk of certain conditions -LRB- e.g. diagnosing retinopathy in diabetics or mascular degeneration for age-related conditions -RRB- . However , Medicare does not cover routine eye exams for glasses or contacts . You can check out the medicare.gov website for more specific information regarding condition/risk requirements for Medicare to pay benefits . You will need to secure coverage under a separate vision insurance plan to receive benefits for glasses , contacts , and other routine services .
You would be best served to assume the answer to this question will be `` No '' , especially if you are over age 18 . Vision exams , eyeglasses and contact lenses are generally covered under a separate vision insurance plan if your employer offers one or you choose to purchase coverage in the individual market . There are certainly some self-funded employer health plans and union health plans that include vision coverage in the major medical package but these are relatively rare . An area of confusion and frustration for many businesses and individuals who are purchasing health insurance plans that meet the minimum essential benefits requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that it requires that PEDIATRIC dental and vision services be covered under the major medical plan . Of course , some people just hear the dental & vision part and think it applies to adults enrolled in the plan -LRB- it does n't -RRB- . The other big surprise can be how the pediatric dental & vision benefits are structured in the health plan . Preventive dental and an annual eye exam should be covered at 100 % . After that , the coverage can vary wildly from one insurance carrier to the next . Some design their pediatric dental & vision benefits like standard vision and dental insurance plans that people have been accustomed to . However , it is not uncommon to find that non-preventive pediatric dental and vision services are subject to the major medical plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , technically your child 's eyeglasses may be covered but if you have a $ 4000 deductible you have n't met then in practical terms this will mean your child 's eyeglasses will be an out-of-pocket expense .
Medicare generally does not cover dental or vision . However , there are certain conditions when Medicare may provide some coverage - this is generally when it 's an integral part of a covered procedure . For dental , Medicare may provide some coverage when it 's an integral part of another procedure , such as procedures conducted during a hospital visit , covered under Part A. Routine checkups , cleanings , fillings , etc. are not covered by Medicare . For vision , Medicare will cover some preventive and diagnostic eye exams such as for glaucoma or macular degeneration . Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare . You can purchase a separate dental and/or vision insurance plan through an insurance agent/broker .
Routine vision eye exams are not covered by Medicare . This would be covered under a separate vision insurance plan or you would pay out of pocket . If a vision exam is deemed medically necessary by your doctor , Medicare may cover it . An example of when this might happen is if someone is diabetic and the doctor is concerned about the possibility of retinopathy , he/she may order a vision exam . In that type of instance , Medicare would cover the exam . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Excellent question and one about which there is much confusion these days . As a general rule , most health insurance policies do not cover routine eye exams -LRB- this would be different from an eye exam required to diagnose and/or treat a medical condition like Macular Degeneration -RRB- . Many employers and a growing number of individuals insure their vision care needs through separate Vision Insurance policies that do cover eye exams , lenses , frames , contact lenses , etc. . Where things get more confusing , and sometimes frustrating for the consumer , is in understanding some of the new benefits mandated by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . One of these mandatory benefits is that coverage for pediatric vision and dental be included in health insurance policies sold on or after January 1 , 2014 . So , you may be paying for a vision benefit that only your children can use and if you have no children you are paying for a benefit you , as an adult , can not use . The consumer should not assume that even if their new ObamaCare compliant policy is in place that this will translate into effective coverage for your dependent children . Each insurance carrier has designed their benefit plans differently in regard to the vision & dental requirements . Some make it an upfront benefit similar to vision insurance coverage you may have seen in the past while others require that the major medical plan 's deductible be met before such services would be reimbursed . So , if you have a Bronze plan with a $ 6000 deductible you technically have some vision coverage for dependent children but no effective coverage until you have met the $ 6000 deductible first . Buyer beware is my advice and the consumer should carefully research this benefit area in the various health insurance options you might be considering . This is another example of where an experienced and knowledgeable health insurance broker can be invaluable in helping you select the health insurance plan best suited to your needs and budget .
Most health insurance plans will cover disease related conditions that may affect your vision . For example , an ocular nevus is a melanoma of the eye , and would be covered . Corrective lenses are rarely covered , as poor vision is not disease related . Contact lenses for adults are therefore rarely covered by health insurance . The Affordable Care Act does stipulate that vision services for children be included as an essential health benefit .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Routine dental and vision care -LRB- such as annual eye exams , routine dental checkups , fillings , crowns , etc. -RRB- is not covered by Medicare and therefore a Medigap plan does n't cover it . Some procedures may be covered under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. you had to go to the emergency room and it was medically necessary to repair something in your mouth immediately or your eye was injured -RRB- - you can check with Medicare if you 're not sure if a given procedure would be covered . Medigap plans are standardized meaning the plan itself is exactly the same , regardless of the carrier you buy it from . Some carriers may offer value-added services with a Medigap plan such as discounts on some services with certain physicians , but not actual dental and vision insurance . If you want to have dental and vision coverage , you would need to add them as a separate supplemental plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No , Medicare does not cover routine dental or vision care . It also does n't cover dentures , hearing aids or the exam for fitting them . However , there are dental and vision plans available and some even cover hearing . A good plan would have immediate coverage for the dental exam , cleanings , fillings and extractions . You should also consider if there is a `` network '' involved .
Routine vision care is normally not covered under a health insurance plan . Vision benefits normally are provided by a separate , stand alone vision plan . Most health insurance plans will cover diagnosis and treatment of injuries to the eye or diseases of the eye . Common vision benefits in a health insurance plan include glaucoma and cataracts .
Some things associated with vision are covered under Medicare and some are not . Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare . Even if you start out taking an routine eye exam and it is determined during the exam that you have eye conditions qualifying for Medicare funded treatment , only subsequent exams for those conditions will be covered . Medicare does cover glaucoma testing for those at risk for glaucoma due to certain conditions or family history . It will cover medically prescribed exams , testing , and treatments for eye conditions that result from illness or injury . Medicare does not cover eyeglasses . It will cover an IOL following a cataract surgery and eyeglass as a prosthesis during cataract surgery recovery .
In the broadest of terms you should assume that a health insurance plan will not cover Lasik as it is generally viewed as an elective surgical procedure used in lieu of wearing eyeglasses or contact lenses . There are case situations though where the use of Lasik may be deemed medically necessary and the claim paid by the insurance carrier . Some examples might be the need for corrective surgery due to an accident or as a result of other surgery . Many health insurance carriers offer vision insurance plans as companion coverage for their individual and/or group medical plans . While these plans generally do n't cover Lasik in the vision plan 's scheduled benefits the quite often come bundled with a discount or flat fee arrangement for Lasik procedures as a value added benefit . As a result , some persons can or may have some discount arrangements in their existing benefit plans and some may not even really be aware of it of have forgotten about it . Check your coverage certificates and if you have a separate vision insurance plan - especially check those as that is where any possible benefit is most likely to show up . If your employer offers a medical Flexible Spending Account -LRB- FSA -RRB- and you are planning for Lasik in the coming year then you should definitely consider setting aside pre-tax dollars in a FSA to pay for your costs if you have no coverage at allor for after any cost sharing you might have through any coverage . FSA dollars can be used for a variety of out-of-pocket medical expenses not covered by your insurance up to $ 2500 per year . So , when you know or are pretty confident you are going to have some level of out-of-pocket expenditure -LRB- s -RRB- for health care in the coming year you are essentially getting a discount equivalent to your tax bracket for the money you were going to spend anyways . Avail yourself of this option if it is available , if not , ask your employer to consider adding such a plan , it can be in the employer 's best interest from a tax perspective as well . Other than the obvious `` you pay for the whole thing '' option , this pretty well covers the spectrum for the non-coverage/coverage conditions for Lasik in health insurance and how the need is often addressed to some degree in many vision insurance plans .
Many vision insurance plans will cover Lasik surgery . Sometimes major medical health insurance policies will cover Lasik surgery if the procedure will restore sight or make a major improvement in your vision when all other corrective procedures have been ineffective . If you have a medical condition that affected your vision and Lasik is recommended your regular health insurance policy may cover the procedure .
Generally speaking dental and vision coverage needs to be added as a separate plan . Routine dental and vision care is not covered by Medicare and therefore not covered by a medigap plan . Some procedures may be covered if Medicare determines it is medically necessary . I suggest you contact an independent agent who specializes in Medicare to assist you with this coverage ...
Medicare parts A and B do not cover vision exams related to prescribing corrective eye wear . There may be coverage if there is a related medical condition . Treatments for any diseases of the eye are generally included . You may want to consider purchasing a supplemental vision plan . Benefits may be paid for routine vision exams , and you can take advantage of discounts on frames and/or contact lenses .
Medicare supplement plan F is the most popular and most comprehensive of the 10 supplement plans , but also features the highest premiums . If budget is not a major concern , I would recommend going with this plan as it offers the most predictable healthcare expense structure - just about everything in hospital and doctor office visits , tests , and exams are covered at 100 % . Plan N can be a great option as well , especially if your doctors accept assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- thus not subjecting you to any excess charges -LRB- which plans F and G cover -RRB- . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans in total and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . In short , each plan has it 's own pros and cons and what may be suitable for you may not be for someone else . Independent agent can provide you with the rates for multiple companies and help get you set up with the plan that 's right for you . Carriers try to differentiate themselves by competing on rates and what , if any , value-added services they offer . Value-added services can be things like a help line , discounts for services -LRB- such as dental and vision - not dental and vision insurance , just discounts off the full price -RRB- , and others . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
Medicare Part B does not cover routine vision exams and eyeglasses . However ... Prescription eyeglasses with standard frames -LRB- or one set of contact lenses -RRB- is covered by Medicare after cataract surgery that implants an intraocular lens . In addition to the above requirement , Medicare will only pay for contact lenses or eye glasses if you purchase from a supplier who is enrolled in Medicare . You are responsible for paying 20 % of the Medicare - approved amount , and the Part B deductible also applies . If you have Medicare Supplement insurance , the Part B deductible and co-insurance may be covered .
I answered a similar question recently but the answer is the same : Also known as ` Medicare Supplement insurance ' , a ` Medi-gap insurance ' policy helps to fill some or all of the financial `` gaps '' between what a person 's Medicare insurance pays and what is left unpaid . For example , it can pay health care expenses incurred , which are unpaid by Medicare such as your deductible , your co-payments & your co-insurance . Medicare Supplement or ` Medi-gap insurance ' does not cover dental , vision , long-term care and some other items . Check to see if you need a separate Medicare Prescription Drug Plan - Part D . You probably will . You need to be under Medicare parts A & B to qualify for a ` Medi-gap ' policy . A lot of well-known carriers are able to sell this type of insurance in each State . Be sure to shop around .
Also known as ` Medicare Supplement ' insurance , this type of health policy helps to fill some or all of the financial `` gaps '' between what a person 's medicare insurance pays and what is left unpaid . For example , it can pay health care expenses incurred and unpaid by Medicare such as a deductible , co-payments & co-insurance . Medicare Supplement insurance does not cover dental , vision , long-term care and some other items . Check to see if you need a separate Medicare Prescription Drug Plan - Part D . You probably will . You need to be under Medicare parts A & B to qualify for a ` medi-gap ' policy . A lot of good carriers are able to sell this type of insurance in each State . Shop around .
Medicare does not cover periodic eye exams for vision testing and does not cover eyeglasses , in most cases . Medicare will pay for one pair of eyeglasses following cataract surgery in which an introcular lens was implanted . Medicare will also pay for treatment or surgery by a medical doctor for eye disease .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much More Is Life Insurance For Smokers ?
Unfortunately , smokers or tobacco rates as it is known in life insurance is expensive . The average life insurance company will increase premiums 2 or 3 times that of a non-tobacco user with equal health risk . . Please keep in mind that you may receive tobacco rates for cigarettes , cigars , chewing tobacco or dip snuff , marijuana , vapor cigs , nicotine patches and nicotine gum . You need to be nicotine free for at least one year with most life insurance carriers in order to qualify for non-tobacco rates . There are a few carriers that will consider non-tobacco rates on a person that smokes an occasional cigar , usually less than 12 per year , but you still must be nicotine free when applying . Be sure to research those procedures .
The rate for smokers is about three times that of nonsmokers . If getting No Exam insurance , the rates for a smoker and nonsmoker are not as far apart as that , but those rates usually start out higher for nonsmokers than with an exam . If there is a table rating or health condition which cigarettes compound the seriousness of the disease , the rates for a smoker can be even higher .
Life insurance is a mortality product . Smoking cigarettes shortens mortality , so the exposure to the life insurance company is greater and that risk is passed in higher premiums . Depending upon your gender , age , health history and current medical condition , your premium could cost an average of 15-20 % more than non smokers .
Since life insurance rates will depend on several factors such as face amount , type of policy , your overall health and insurability profile , etc , the real question is how much MORE does life insurance cost for a smoker . Most companies differentiate between different types of tobacco use . An occasional cigar smoker may get a better rate than a cigarette smoker . A cigarette smoker could expect to pay 30 % to 50 % more in premiums depending on their age than a non-tabacco user .
Yes , indeed they do . And the test is pretty reliable . Want to hear an interesting story ? A number of years ago I took an application from a client who disclosed that he did smoke cigarettes on a daily basis . So I quoted him smoker rates . He provided the lab specimens for the insurance exam and we all assumed they would show he was indeed a smoker . When the results came back , he had tested negative for nicotine even though he smoked every day ! Our assumption was he had a huge tolerance and it just didnt register in the lab . So , fair being fair , the underwriter gave him non-smoker rates ! And he paid about half as much as he would have as a smoker . Of course , smokers cant count on that always happening . They should expect to pay smoker rates . And most smokers hate paying that extra premium for that extra mortality risk . -LRB- And by the way - there is a huge amount of data to show that smoking does increase your mortality risk . Sorry . -RRB- So what should a smoker do ? Lie on the application ? I mean , who is really going to know if you say you dont smoke , and just go without cigarettes for a few weeks ? Your lab specimen should then come out clean , right ? Bad idea . Not good . Dont do it . That is insurance fraud , you know . You could jeopardize the claim getting paid . Besides which , this is not a game . Life insurance pricing has to accurately reflect the risk obligations taken on . If everybody scammed the system to get undercharged , then odds are the insurance carriers wouldnt have enough money to pay out benefit . Then everybodys beneficiaries would lose out . Not only that : there is something to be said for acting honorably , dont you think ? Your word should be your bond . What about postponing the purchase of the policy and waiting a year or two , so you can quit in the meantime and then qualify for non-smoker rates ? Well , okay , but who says youll be insurable at that point ? What if you come down with high blood pressure , high cholesterol , or high blood sugar , or any number of things that could throw the rates off ? Or even worse , make you ineligible for coverage at all ? Delaying is not worth the risk . Best thing to do is buy the policy now for the best smoker rates available . Keep it in force . Then , stop smoking . If you qualify for non-smoker rates , go for it . If you are eligible for a better rate , then good for you . But if you are not , then at least you have coverage . Either way , your beneficiaries will get what they need . Good move .
The cost of life insurance for a smoker varies with age , gender and build , just as it does for life insurance for a nonsmoker . However , when you throw in a health condition , being a smoker can increase premiums much more than it does for a nonsmoker . Smoking while having diabetes , heart disease , COPD , even osteoporosis , can cause rates to jump exponentially , or even be declined . One way to get around this can be to purchase a simplified issue life insurance policy . Their smoker rates tend to not have quite as large a variation as medically underwritten policies , and they may not be as strict about the impact of smoking upon that health condition . There are also medically underwritten policies that treat smokers much better than others . Contact an agency that specializes in smoker life insurance to get your most competitive rate .
Unfortunately , that is too broad a question to give a specific answer . I can however , point you in the right direction . Smoking status is just one factor in assessing risks and setting rates . Smokers usually will pay more than non-smokers . The reason for the word usually , as opposed to definitely , is that in Canada some companies approach smoking differently . In other words , they charge smokers different rates based on what and how much they smoke . For example , cigar smokers are generally permitted to smoke 1 cigar a month with many companies to still be considered `` non-smokers '' for insurance purposes . I suspect it is for purely competitive reasons for cigar-smoking golfers . However , a more realistic approach is allowing 50 cigars a year which some companies take . I suggest that you look at the online quoting services to get an idea and then work with a local independent agent / broker to get the right policy at the right price . It is very important that you are truthful when declaring your smoking status as the company can deny your claim if you are not . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . The company will look at your personal medical history , smoker status , height/weight profile , results of the medical exam -LRB- if applying for a policy requiring it - no exam policies typically cost more -RRB- , your family medical history -LRB- e.g. cancer or heart disease before age 60 in the immediate family -RRB- , motor vehicle record , and any hazardous activities you may participate in -LRB- such as aviation , scuba diving , drag racing , etc -RRB- . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This will depend on a number of factors , but for a given age , gender , and risk class - the premiums for a smoker will be roughly about 50 % more than non-smoker rates -LRB- can be higher , varies by carrier -RRB- . Some carriers may offer non-smoker rates to tobacco users depending on the type of tobacco and frequency of usage . The types of tobacco that carriers may consider for non-smoker rates are cigars , pipe smokers , and chewing tobacco - if you 're using cigarettes , you 're going to get smoker rates . To get a realistic projection of cost , you will want to review your height/weight and medical history with an independent agent to identify the risk class you 're most likely to qualify for -LRB- this determines the premiums for the program -RRB- , the age of the proposed insured -LRB- PI -RRB- , whether you 're male or female , a tobacco user or not , amount of coverage you want to secure/need , and how long you want to have the coverage in place for .
Great question . Smokers usally pay more on life insurance about % 20 - % 50 more . Keep in mind not all companies have the same rates . Some companies charge more for smokers and some companies have good rates for that type of class . They will also ask how many do you smoke a day the less per day you migh get a preferred smoker rate .
If you smoke cigarettes , Life Insurance rates run approximate three times what they would be for a nonsmoker . With very competitive smoker rates , the difference is not quite as much ; with a health condition combined with smoking , the difference in premiums could be much higher . Smoking an occasional cigar does not have much effect on rates at all , however . And even a daily cigar can qualify for nonsmoker rates with a few companies . Unfortunately , there is no break for those who are social cigarette smokers except that can be rated Preferred Smoker if their other health and risk factors are Preferred .
Usually , most policies require a quick medical exam , which includes a urine sample . And they will test for pot . The good news is that most companies will not decline you coverage . They will just consider you a `` Smoker '' and give you smoker rates . But , currently , I know of 3 companies that offer `` Non-Smoker '' rates to pot smokers . Aviva is the most relaxed about it . And will allow up to a `` Preferred '' non-smoker rating for using 2 times per week or less . Lincoln National is next and will give Standard Non-Smoker ratings to people who smoke 2 times per week or less . MetLife allows for 1 time per week and will offer a Standard nonsmoker rating . Prudential allows for 2 times per month , and offers a Standard nonsmoker rating . Long story short if you smoke Pot , Aviva or Lincoln National will be your best bets . And this list is as of 3/2013 , it could easily change .
The short answer : Much more expensive than if you did n't ! Rates for smokers tend to be twice -LRB- or more -RRB- as expensive as rates for non-smokers . Some life insurance companies are better suited to smokers than others , so keep this in mind if you are shopping for a policy . An independent agent who has access to a wide variety of carriers can find you the best rates for your particular situation .
Insurance companies tend to assign policyholders into a risk group - high risk , low risk , average risk , etc. . Life insurance companies really have only two risk classes : standard and preferred . Within these classes you can have subclasses : standard smoker . Standard non-smoker . Preferred smoker . Preferred non-smoker . And you can have preferred best and standard best subclasses as well . Table ratings are typically assessed on top of the standard underwriting class . The rating means that you basically are considered a standard risk , but due to one or more other factors , your risk is higher than the average standard risk . Insurance companies vary in how they weigh each table , but typically , each table represents a 25 % increase in price over standard . So , if your standard premium is $ 1000 per year , a table A rating would make that premium $ 1250 . A table B rating would make that premium $ 1500 . And so on . I have seen carriers assist table ratings for all types of reasons . These include a high PSA ; history of heart attack ; build ; alcohol history ; driving record ; mountain climbing ; prior drug use ; cancer history ; scuba diving ; aviation ; foreign travel . Basically , you could take a look at every one of the questions on your insurance application , and depending on your answer , an insurance carrier may want to assess extra premium . On the overall , I think that system works in favor of the consumer . You are still able to get coverage . The system is much better than a black or white , take-you-or - leave - you set up . In addition , I think that by and large these extra premiums are assessed fairly . Obviously , the broker needs to hook you up with the carrier that will most aggressively apply its underwriting guidelines in your case . One carrier may only assess a table B , but another one might be a table G ! Still another one might decline you altogether . Your broker needs to be your guide in fending your way through the life insurance carrier jungle out there :-RRB- One other important note here : carriers sometimes have sales on policies through what are called table shaving discounts . This means that for certain types of cases , for a set period of time only , they will make an offer of standard to somebody who normally would be assessed a table rating . They usually cap it at table D or so . And they usually limit it to only permanent insurance such as universal life . Sales like this can give consumers really good bargains . Basically , you could buy a permanent product for a lower cost than a term product simply because the underwriting concessions wouldnt be available on the term product . I would also like to add that carriers typically go up to table L or so . When I have a client who represents a very high risk due to a serious medical condition or dangerous hobby , I like to see how high I can get a carrier to go with a table rating . I mean , if somebody really needs the coverage and has the money to pay for it , why not put hit with the premium to make it worth your while ? Its fun to see how hungry carriers can be for somebodys business :-RRB- .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Fully underwritten life insurance policies require you to declare whether or not you use any tobacco products . Although cigars and pipes are smoked , the question seems to suggest cigarettes . Cigarette smoking shortens life expectancy , so smokers pay more for life insurance . If smoking is declared on the application and the life insurance company offers an underwriting decision after the due diligence process , a death claim will be paid . If the insured takes up smoking after the policy has been issued as a nonsmoker , the life insurance company will pay the claim . It is the circumvention of truth that may indeed be classified as fraud that could void the policy in certain states or reduce the death benefit based on smoker rates at the date of issue . Some occasional smokers attempt to beat the urine analysis detection of cotinine , the byproduct of nicotine , by not smoking 8-10 days before the exam banking on their body chemistry to purge the continine from their systems . But you would have to lie on the application . And again , lying on the application could be considered fraud in some states . My advice : There is one life insurance company that offers nonsmoking rates to smokers for three years in an attempt to give the insured time to quit smoking . We can help with that . But bottom line : do n't try to game the system .
There are several ways that a life insurance company can know or learn that you smoke -LRB- what you smoke was not specified but we 'll go for tobacco on this one -RRB- . 1 -RRB- Self Reporting - they ask you on your application if you are a tobacco user and , depending upon the value of the policy being applied for , may ask for fairly detailed information on your type and frequency of tobacco usage . So , to honestly complete the initial application the applicant themselves should be the person informing the insurance carrier about their tobacco use status . 2 -RRB- Physical Exam - as a condition of your application you may be required to get a basic physical examination where things like height & weight can be verified and where , quite often , blood and/or urine samples are also taken to screen for health issues and to detect drugs such as Nicotine in the applicant 's system . 3 -RRB- Electronic Medical Records - most life insurance carriers will check your application 's answers against information about you in the Medical Information Bureau . An indicated history of tobacco use when none is reported on the person 's application would be an underwriting red flag . Also , information about whether you have been issued life insurance as a smoker , declined or rated as a smoker on a life insurance application can also turn up . 4 -RRB- Leg Work - few of us will have this problem , but if you are applying for a really large amount of life insurance the insurance carriers may actually conduct investigations into an applicant 's background and medical history . These may include interviews with friends and family . So , if they figure out you are really a Mafia boss rather than the president of the local trash company , your application for $ 50 million in coverage may get turned down . To take out a life insurance policy as a non-smoker when you really are a smoker would be an act of fraud -LRB- a misrepresentation on the applicant 's part -RRB- . And even if you were to get issued at a non-smoker 's rates that does n't mean you are home free . Life insurance policies standardly have a two year contestability provision in them where the insurance company can terminate or adjust the policy if it can prove that you made any false statements on your application . But , if your misrepresentation about your tobacco use is determined to meet the legal requirements of fraud -LRB- pretty good chance they will -RRB- then the contestability period is indefinite .
There are a lot of factors that go into the price of life insurance . Every year that you get older , the price increases for insurance . It also depends on how much life insurance you are looking for . The higher the death benefit , the higher the monthly premium . Another factor to consider is your health . Life insurance is based on the insurance companys risk . If you are unhealthy or have a few high risk health conditions , you will have to pay a higher rate for insurance . It is also up to the insurance company . Some insurance companies charge more for the exact same coverage . Also , women have a longer life expectancy then men so the rates for women are usually lower . There are two types of life insurance too . Term insurance only covers you for a period of time and whole life covers you for a lifetime and you are guaranteed a payout . Term is usually cheaper because if you dont pass in the specified term , the insurance company does not pay out anything . For policies that have a large death benefit , the insurance company usually asks for an exam to be done that checks your blood , heart rate , and other key health related factors . The rate is usually higher for smokers compared to non-smokers . Life insurance rates are determined on a case by case basis .
Yes , indeed . Here is a sure fire way to get denied life insurance for smoking pot : Smoke it . Dont disclose this on your application . Then test positive on your insurance exam for marijuana . You will notice that the key to your downfall here is not disclosing it on your application . Trying to pull a fast one on the underwriter is a great way to get denied . And by the way : dont think about not disclosing it on your application , and then waiting a long time so it wont show up in your lab specimen . Thats insurance fraud . Not a good way to start a relationship with a life insurance carrier . Now you are going to ask , What if I do disclose it ? Will I get accepted ? Not only might you get accepted , but if you apply with the right company , you could get approved at preferred non-smoker rates ! How do you like that ? It all depends on the amount and frequency used . And you have to apply with a company who has very lenient underwriting guidelines for pot smokers . Some do ; a lot dont . But there is more to the story here . If you smoke cigarettes as well as pot , you will end up with a smoker rating . Dont forget that . Another item : many people smoke marijuana as a form of self-medication . They have trouble sleeping , so they smoke pot . They feel anxious , so they smoke pot . They feel a little depressed , so they smoke pot . If you have a history of dealing with these issues , then the underwriter will look a bit more closely at your marijuana use . If it appears that you do have medical concerns that are not being addressed adequately with medical treatment , he may not be confident that your pot smoking is purely recreational . That may affect his willingness to make an offer , and if he does so , at a low rate . By the way : I have helped people get policies who intake marijuana through a vaporizer , as opposed to smoking it . That can add an additional complication to underwriting . Some underwriters feel that is a more intense form of ingestion and has a more severe impact on your body . Something else for you to think about : any brushes with the law in relation to your marijuana use must be disclosed on your application . Remember that your legal record is part and parcel of the underwriting process . Lots to think about here , Makes you want to light up , doesnt it ?
Yes , usually testing during the life insurance underwriting process will include testing for `` pot '' . While it may not mean a decline of the offer of insurance , it will change the price offered in many cases . Many `` pot '' smokers do not smoke cigarettes , some insurance carriers consider `` pot '' smokers to still be smokers and adjust the premium upward . As we move into a time where many states are legalizing `` pot '' expect some changes in how `` pot '' is considered , but it may take a long time before this happens .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How To Compare Medicare Part D Plans ?
You can compare Medicare part D prescription drug plans on the Medicare.gov website under the `` Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- '' tab and clicking on the `` find health & drug plans '' tool . An independent agent can also help compare plans and help you enroll for a prescription drug plan that 's right for you .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
If youdefinehaving insurance coverage for your prescription drugs when you are age 65 + as `` good '' when prior to the Bush administration 's implementation of this plan seniors on traditional Medicare did n't , then Medicare Part D is definitely a good thing . In fact , some would argue that Medicare Part D , with its pesky reliance on private insurance options and marketplace competition , is the only part of Medicare that has delivered on it 's promises of expanding coverage for a high utilization population segment and managed to come in under initial cost projections . Medicare Part D is just another level of Medicare coverage specifically designed to address prescription drug coverage . As with Medicare supplement plans , different insurance carriers offer Medicare Part D plans with different levels of coverage and price points for consumers to select from during their initial eligibility period and subsequent open enrollment renewal years . This means that the consumer is obliged to shop around because not all Medicare Part D plans are created equal , far from it . Most consumers would be well served to use the services of an insurance broker who is knowledgeable in the various Medicare Part D plans available in their marketplace .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
`` Original '' Medicare will cover SOME medications under Part B . As a general rule , infusion therapy , immunizations administered in your doctor 's office and most diabetic supplies -LRB- including insulin -RRB- may be covered under Part B. Most prescriptions filled on an outpatient basis by mail order or at a retail pharmacy are covered under Medicare Part D. Your Part D prescription drug plan is a separate benefit offered by private insurance carriers . The premium you pay will vary by zip code and the covered medications . Many Part D plans have an annual deductible that must be satisfied before brand name prescriptions are included with copay 's . Be sure to verify that the medications you take are included in your Part D drug formulary You can compare drug formulary 's at Medicare.gov by using the drug formulary prescription plan finder .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you have a Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- , you should be able to call your Part D insurance company to find out which pharmacies are in your area that accept your Plan . Another way to find out which pharmacies accept your Medicare Part D plan is to visit medicare.gov and choose the tab that says Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- . Scroll to the bottom of the list and select Find Health and Drug Plans . You will now be on a page titled Medicare Plan Finder . Enter your zip code in the General Search box and click on the Find Plans button . You are now on a page that is Step 1 of 4 . Complete the appropriate information for the questions asked and click the Continue to Plan Results question . Step 2 of 4 asks you to enter your drugs . Youll need to enter the name of at least one drug . Once completed , you can submit the list and youll move to Step 3 : Select Your Pharmacies . The database will show you pharmacies in your area . You can change the range of miles within your zip code from 1 , 5 , 6 , and 8 . The database provides phone numbers for the pharmacies . It is in your best interest to call the pharmacy and make sure they accept your particular Medicare Part D plan before venturing out to fill your prescription .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- help seniors cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - a Medigap plan can pay all or a portion of the other 20 % , depending on which plan you have . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- with a Medigap plan will help you limit your out-of-pocket expenses and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Original Medicare will also accept your Medigap plan . There are 10 different Medigap plans and they are all standardized - meaning each plan type is exactly the same from every insurance company regardless of who you have your coverage through -LRB- the only difference being the price you pay for your Medigap plan -RRB- . The 10 Medigap plans are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . The benefits that can be secured under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To apply for Medicare Part D in New Jersey , a good website to go to is : WEBSITELINK . There you will find some Medicare Part D plans to enroll in and how to enroll in Medicare Part D plans in New Jersey . They also provide a phone number where you can contact them to enroll in Medicare Part D.
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Is Health Insurance In The USA ?
Expensive . You can choose different plans with varying coverages , deductibles and benefits but the bottom line is that Health Insurance is very expensive . Insurance companies are constantly trying to create products that will not only fit the public 's need but are affordable . In the end health insurance is more expensive when you need it and do n't have it as medical care is enough to wreck your financial life . Be creative in your quotes and try to find an affordable solution , even if you ca n't have all the coverages available .
The answer to your question can vary from health insurance carrier to health insurance carrier and may also be a function of whether you are covered under a self-insured plan with an employer who has made specific provisions for coverage outside of the USA . To the surprise -LRB- sometimes very unfortunate surprise -RRB- of many travelers , many health insurance plans do not provide coverage outside of the USA . You will really need to look at your certificate of coverage , check with your HR person or insurance agent to determine what your specific policy will do in such situations . I would start out with the conservative assumption that you would not be covered for a health care need outside of the USA and then you can only be pleasantly surprised . There are specialty health insurance policies for international health insurance coverage that can be purchased to provide protection to persons traveling or staying overseas for some period of time . If your domestic health insurance policy does not cover you outside of the USA or provides only limited coverage you may want to consider purchasing one of these specialty policies before going outside of the country .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
There is no one best life insurance policy in the USA . That is like asking what is the best car in the USA . The type of life insurance -LRB- or car -RRB- that people buy depends on their budget , what they are using it for , what company they like , and whether they want to keep it for a long time or trade it off in the near future . A good life insurance agent will gather your personal health details , financial information , and desires , and find the best policy for you as an individual person .
Objectively , there is no one best life insurance company in the USA , although some people certainly have personal opinions about which life insurance companies they like best . There are four main rating agencies that people consult to review the financial information of life insurance companies , and to see what they are rated . These rating agencies are AM Best , Standard and Poor 's , Moody 's , and Fitch . Some also look at Weiss and others . Looking at a database of complaints against the company can also influence what someone considers to be the best life insurance company in the USA .
There are a number of reasons , the primary being that , should you become disabled the bills do not stop coming in . Case in point , a close friend recently had a triple bi-pass operation . He has been off work for three months . Could you make your house payment , pay your utilities and credit card bills , buy food and other necessities if you had no pay coming in during that period ? If you own a business , would your business be able to continue to operate ? How long would you be able to make it without your paycheck ? How much of a dent would it put into your retirement or college fund ? Disability and Medical Expenses are the leading cause of bankruptcy in the USA . Why not protect your family from the devastating effects of disability ?
Medicare is a federal program . The benefits are the same regardless of the state in which you live . Incidentally , it isnt the same should you travel outside the USA or reside outside the USA . This produces a dilemma for medical providers as the cost of services isnt the same everywhere . In some places Medicare payments are deemed adequate . In others , they are inadequate .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
USAA 's website states that their long term care insurance is underwritten by John Hancock Life Insurance Company -LRB- USA -RRB- . USAA Life General Agency -LRB- known in CA and NY as USAA Life and Health Insurance Agency -RRB- acts as an agent to provide long term care insurance to its members . Plans are not available in all states .
Yes . There is absolutely no requirement that a person be a citizen to buy life insurance . Each company makes its own decisions on requirements , but citizenship is not one of them . So long as you are in the country legally , you can buy life insurance . Different ID 's are required by different carriers , but rest assured that if your age and health warrant it , you can buy life insurance on yourself here in the USA . Love to help . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
The most common homeowner policy forms of coverage written in the USA today includes the peril of theft - also called the `` cause of loss '' . All policies also include limitations and exclusions that may restrict theft to certain dollar figures or certain types of property to a certain dollar amounts . Generally speaking , the theft of an air conditioning unit is not one of the common types of property that is limited or excluded . You should not assume this advice is the same for policies covering rental properties as they are occasionally written without the theft peril due to the choice of coverage terms . In some rare cases theft is a cause of loss that can be bought back in certain coverage amounts for an additional premium on rental/landlord type policies . The DF3 or DP3 forms include theft for landlords but check local representatives for specific advice in your locality that conforms to local custom and practice . Either way , it is still a good question for your local representative who can point to the exact language or limitation in your insurance coverage and help you understand how to deal with the new exposure to the theft of devices and property that has aluminum , copper , and other metals of value from your property . .
I suppose if that were to happen in 2014 you would contact your department of insurance and file a complaint . The ACA does not allow people to be denied health insurance coverage . it would be very unique and unusual for an insurance company to violate such a clear and well publisised law . But , if you happen to find yourself in that situation , I guess my advise is to file a complaint . ... Or maybe call the company and ask if that just landed in the USA and do n't understand the new rules !
The basic reason for life insurance is love . Do you want your children to pay more or less than you for life insurance ? Do you think they will ever need life insurance ? Would their premature death create financial problems ? Do you want to protect their ability to buy life insurance ? Do you want a vehicle that will help them accumulate cash for the future ? One hundred years ago , parents across the USA bought life insurance on their children .
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company was established in Massachusetts in 1862 . John Hancock went from a mutual company to a stock company in the year 2000 , and was renamed John Hancock Financial Services , Inc. . Manulife Financial Corp -LRB- based in Cananda -RRB- acquired John Hancock Financial in 2004 . John Hancock Life Insurance Company now writes life insurance in the USA . It is a highly respected carrier for life insurance and other financial products .
In the USA , life insurance is taken out on someone because their loss would cause a financial hardship for someone else . The insured person selects a beneficiary to whom the policy payments would go upon his or her death . Some policies also have a savings feature so that they build up cash value which can be used while the insured person is still alive .
David 's article is well written and the basic principles are the same in Canada , the design and tax regulations and advantages are of course very different . Accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- - your money invested is guaranteed Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIF -RRB- also referred to as segregated funds or variable annuities - your money is invested in equities and is not guaranteed . Since the products are issued under the insurance act they include maturity and death benefit guarantees , typically 75 % or 100 % . Payout annuities : You exchange a lump sum of money for a stream of payments for the rest of your life or for a specified number of years . Since they provide a guaranteed pension income they are often used by retirement income planners to cover fixed expenses . The guarantees , estate planning applications , potential creditor proofing and tax advantages are reasons why annuities are an important part of retirement planning . In Canada as in the USA , whether or not an annuity is right for you depends on your individual circumstances . Using an annuity strategy is not always complicated , it is however , often permanent . In most provinces in Canada , almost anyone can call themselves a Financial Adviser or Financial Planner . Look for an insurance broker with a professional designation like a Chartered Life Underwriter -LRB- CLU -RRB- or Certified Financial Planner -LRB- CFP -RRB- . Annuities are often used in combination to increase after tax income , guarantee income , address volatility , `` lock in '' gains , leave a legacy , ensure privacy and provide potential creditor protection . With their increased risk exposure protecting your retirement nest egg is of special importance if you are the self employed . You can find 16 `` I want to ... how do I '' examples at www.jpw.ca If you have further questions please contact me .
I insured a car in a European country that didnt have a speed limit on its main thoroughfares . That policy cost me a multiple of my USA based car insurance because the frequency and severity of accidents was greater . I have insured a car in an Asian country where liability claims were settled for a very small amount and the car could be fixed on most street corners . That insurance was inexpensive . My suspicion is that auto insurance is less in most countries , but higher in a few .
Monumental Life Insurance Company joined with Life Investors Financial Group , Inc , to form Transamerica Agency Network , Inc , in 2011 . Monumental Life Insurance Company was founded in 1858 . The Aegon USA Group , of which Monumental Life is now a part , was rated A + by AM Best recently . To compare Monumental Life insurance quotes from those from other companies , visit a website with that offers instant quotes .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Offers Whole Life Insurance ?
Almost all of the major insurance carriers offer whole life insurance . Contact a local insurance agent in your area . If you already have homeowners or auto insurance coverage with a carrier contact them first . They may have policies available that will fit your requirments . A agent can help you decide what levels and type of coverage would be appropriate at this point in your life .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most agents who sell Term Life Insurance also sell Whole Life . The exception may be some of the `` term shops '' on the internet . Final expense policies are usually Whole Life , so agents specializing in Senior life insurance would carry Whole Life . These usually have under $ 100,000 face amounts . `` Captive '' agencies -LRB- where they sell products for one company -RRB- usually have good Whole Life products for persons looking for larger face amounts . So do agencies that sell multiple products , but you need to consult with a licensed agent who understands Whole Life . A good way to start would be to call and ask for an agent who can compare a couple of Whole Life policies for you in detail . If they are unable to do that , move on to the next one .
A whole life insurance policy is an extremely flexible product that can meet many needs in retirement . The most obvious need is death . It is obvious that retirement always ends in death . Death is not inexpensive . The proceeds of a whole life insurance policy can pay off some or all of those expenses . After a certain age term policies can not be written at any price . I recently had a client who forgot that there was a life policy on her husband . She was paying his funeral expenses on an installment plan . I discovered the policy and brought it to her attention . She was delighted . Another use of a whole life policy is to transfer property to heirs . Often a person will want to leave money to children , grandchildren or a favorite charity . They will then try to conserve their retirement assets so that money will be available when the die . Unfortunately they often rob themselves of lifes simple pleasures in their drive to provide that inheritance . A life insurance policy can do that at the beginning of retirement leaving the person the balance of assets to spend as they wish . Some people have estates that are subject to estate tax . The problem with estate tax is that if there isnt cash to pay the taxes , assets are often sold at below market value to pay the tax . Having cash can make the difference of keeping the family business going , maintaining the family farm or closing them up for taxes . Since that can happen at any time , a whole life policy is particularly flexible in that regard . Whole life insurance is often used when a person wants to leave a specific valuable asset to one child but wants to treat all the children in the same manner . The heirs that are not going to get that valuable asset could receive equivalent proceeds from a whole life policy and everyone would be happy . A whole life policy is often used to purchase the interest of another party in a business . In this case the surviving partners dont particularly want to share everything with a widow who may not be acquainted with the business . A whole life policy can provide the cash to take care of that situation by giving the survivors the funds they need to purchase the widows interests . Sometimes whole life insurance is used to fund day to day living expenses in retirement . I just finished a comparison that showed that a whole life policy performed as well as a fixed annuity in accumulating money for retirement and that it did that with the promise to pay the full benefit should the person die before retiring . The whole life policy has non-forfeiture provisions which can pay a lifetime stream of income if desired or the policy would also give the person the flexibility to use the policy in other ways depending upon future , unforeseen events . This may sound strange but I often get requests for whole life insurance from older individuals . They seem to appreciate the value of lasting protection at a fixed price .
There are several difference between Whole Life and Term Life Insurance . Put very simply , here are some : 1 -RRB- Term life insurance lasts for a `` term '' ; Whole life lasts for one 's `` whole life '' . These both depend on payments to last that long . 2 -RRB- Term life insurance does not have cash value ; Whole life insurance has cash value . Again , how the policy and payments are set up will determine the amount of cash value . 3 -RRB- Term life insurance only protects against death ; Whole life has options to use the policy while alive . There are some Term policies that now offer `` living options '' , as well ; however , Whole Life offers even more options than those .
Whole life policies are well suited for needs that do not diminish over time . Some commonly found uses for whole life are : Family protection : To provide funds to support a surviving spouse and/or minor children , particularly for individuals who start a family later in life ; to pay final bills , such as medical or other estate expenses and federal and state death taxes . Business planning : Whole life insurance is often used for many different business purposes , such as insuring key employees , in split-dollar insurance arrangements , and funding non-qualified deferred compensation plans . Business continuation planning often involves using whole life insurance as a source of funds for buy-sell agreements . Accumulation needs : Some individuals will use the cash value feature of whole life as a way of accumulating funds for specific purposes , such as funding college education , or as a supplemental source of retirement income . Charitable gifts : To provide funds for a gift to charity . Whole life insurance , sometimes called permanent insurance , or ordinary life , is designed to stay in force throughout ones lifetime . As long as the policy owner meets his or her obligations under the policy , the policy remains in force , regardless of any changes in health that may occur . Unlike term insurance , where premium payments generally increase , as the insured gets older -LRB- the chance of death increases with age -RRB- , premiums for most whole life policies remain level . A portion of each premium payment is set aside to earn interest . Over time , a whole life policy will develop cash values . The accumulated cash values form a reserve which enable the insurer to pay a policys full death benefit , while keeping premiums level . During life , many whole life policies have provisions to borrow a portion of the accumulated cash value . If a policy is terminated without the insured dying , there are various surrender options for the cash value available to a policy owner . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' whole life rates . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . There are a number of factors that go into the calculation of rates for a policy , but that 's only one area to think about . Some carriers may offer participating whole life policies -LRB- paying dividends that can be used to buy paid-up additions , reduce the premiums , or pay cash to the policyowner -RRB- - other whole life policies may be non-participating -LRB- meaning they do not pay any dividends -RRB- . Another factor determining which program will be best for your needs is the risk class . People may qualify for different risk classes with each carrier because each person has a different medical history and each carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines -LRB- some carriers may be more aggressive in their underwriting and others may be more conservative -RRB- . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies to see who will offer you the lowest rates for what program you 're looking to set up .
First off , excellent question . Whole Life Insurance is backed by the full faith and credit of the Carrier offering it . In many cases , Whole Life is sold by career insurance agents and they are `` captive '' to their carrier . That means that the agent does n't have a choice of carriers that might be offered . But there are ways for `` independent '' established agents who can offer multiple carriers and probably the best AGENT that can sell it to you . Once you decide on a agent who will be your advocate , like a real estate agent , they would work on your behalf and show you your options . The top Whole Life Carriers are as follows and in no particular order : Northwestern Mutual , New York Life , Mass Mutual , Guardian , Ohio National , Penn Mutual and MetLife . When comparing these carrier 's products , make sure that you understand how they credit their earnings -LRB- i.e. dividends -RRB- as you become an owner of the company with these policies and their performance is directly correlated with the health and well being of the carrier itself . And do n't just look at the current rate , or listen to an agent 's promise of how it will perform , because this life insurance will be with you for your WHOLE LIFE . It is a long term commitment that will protect your family , provide access to cash when you need it , and even can provide Long Term Care protection that is paid out of the policy while you are alive .
Whole life insurance has many advantages to it . The first being that your premiums are fixed and guaranteed for the rest of your life and as a permanent insurance program , it builds cash value over time . If it 's a participating whole life policy , any dividends that are paid out can be used to either increase the death benefit via paid up additions , reduce your premium , or make a payment to you directly -LRB- options depend on which carriers whole life policy you have -RRB- . If you use the dividends to reduce the premium , the policy can become self-sustaining after a number of years - meaning no more premium payments . Non-participating policies only build cash value - these types of plans do not pay out dividends . If you 're buying whole life coverage when you 're young and its cash value builds for years and years , it can create a nice nest egg for funds that can be used during your retirement years . It 's important to remember that if you borrow from an insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the monies are expected to be paid back . If you cash out the policy , you lose the life insurance coverage . An alternative for those who are not very concerned about the cash value and want to maximize the death benefit of your life insurance , you may want to consider a guaranteed universal life policy instead of whole life . GULs can offer a larger amount of coverage than whole life policies for the same premium or save you a ton of money on your premiums for a given level of coverage . Make sure to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can create a structure that will best serve your needs , goals , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life covers you for your `` whole life '' . Term Life covers you for a term , or set number of years . Whole Life has cash value that can be utilized while you are still alive . Term Life does not -LRB- except for Term with living benefits , which allows you to use part of the death benefit if certain triggers are met -RRB- . Whole Life allows you to pay the entire premium at once , or in a limited number of years , after which no more premiums are owed . Term Life requires that you make periodic payments over the entire duration of the policy . If you drop a Whole Life policy after some length of time , you will usually have a reduced paid up policy that you can keep without making further premium payments . If you drop a Term policy , your coverage ends and you do not have any return of cash -LRB- unless you buy ROP , or return of premium Term Life -RRB- . With participating Whole Life , you may get dividend checks over the years . With Term Life , the only benefit you get will be if you die before the term ends . Whole Life costs more because it is a permanent product and has cash value in addition to death protection . Term Life costs less because it is temporary and offers pure death protection .
Gerber Whole Life Insurance , per their website , if offered to persons age 18-65 and in face amounts of $ 25,000 to $ 150,000 . Gerber also uses Whole Life in their Grow-Up Plan . Whole Life insurance is permanent insurance that has cash value . To determine the best Whole Life insurance for you , contact an agent that offers a variety of Whole Life policies to compare features and projected cash values .
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
What is the best type of life insurance to purchase ? The answer depends on what you want the insurance for and for how long the coverage is needed . Life insurance basically creates cash at death which can be used to create or conserve wealth . There are additional features available depending on the type of plan and how you are planning to use it in your overall financial planning . Here are the main types of life insurance and some factors to consider : Term life insurance As the name implies , coverage is for a specified term : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 years , etcetera . At the end of the term the term the policy renews at a higher premium . Factors to consider include : how long you need the coverage for , the rate at renewal and if you will need to convert to permanent insurance . Whole life insurance With whole your coverage is for your whole life . The factors to consider include whether the policy is participating and is eligible for dividends or non-participating . In addition the policy guarantees such as premium and cash value . The company financials and dividend history are important considerations especially when considering a participating whole life policy . Universal life insurance Coverage for your whole life if properly managed . This type of coverage offers more flexibility in premium level , insurance cost and investment options . These are all factors to consider . Working with an independent insurance broker , who understands your needs , will help you decide on the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Whole Life Insurance is not bad . It depends on who you are talking to and why they are saying that . WHole life provides a service . It gives a client a steady , non chaning premium each month ; it can last till age 100 ; it builds cash flow . It is what is called permanent coverae . Unlike term insurance , it doesnt change as you get older . Whole life is also very useful in providing key man insurance -LRB- insurance a company buys on top performers -RRB- and for those who may want to pay on their policies for a few years and then end up with a paid up policy . There can be many benefits to owning a whole life policy . Sadly there have been those in the marketplace selling and pushing only term insurance . Statistically people do better saving money as they pay their premiums on their insurance instead of `` investing the difference '' The onlyway to see which policy works in your bet interest is to meet with an agent who is not trying to sell you insurance ; rather meet with an agent who is working to provide you with the best insurance option for your particular situation and life goals ; you will be very happy you did !
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
Whole life insurance is for a very special kind of person . First of all , you are someone who sees the need for life insurance protection on a lifelong basis . Not just to cover the mortgage , not just to protect your family , not just as a supplement for your retirement . You face the fact that as life goes on , your need for life insurance changes , but for many people , the need is always there . And it could be for you . You know that if you bought term insurance , odds are you 'd end up buying another policy anyway , after that one renews . At a higher price . And hopefully youre insurable . Might as well lock in to guaranteed rates on a permanent basis . This brings up the second point . You are a guarantee-oriented type of person . You realize that life insurance is the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it has to be strong . Reliable . You do n't want too many variables in this product because , if you have a shaky foundation , your whole portfolio could crumble . Therefore , you want a guarantee on the premium , and you want a guarantee on the death benefit . You are also someone who appreciates the added benefit of cash value inside whole life insurance . For many people , whole life insurance is the guaranteed portion of their asset portfolio . No other product gives better guarantees -LRB- go ahead and check out the interest rates on guaranteed products out there . Then compare them to the guarantees whole life gives you . -RRB- On top of that , with a top-flight company , the dividends - the non-guaranteed portion of the cash build up - can be pretty rich . With a little strategic thinking , those dividends can enhance the value of that product . They can be used to offset the cost . They can be used to enhance the survivor benefit . They can be used to put cash in your pocket . They can be used to offset the cost of another policy . Lastly , whole life insurance is for disciplined people . In order to receive all the benefits named above , you need to stick to the payment schedule . It 's a fixed-premium product and will not tolerate underfunding , or over funding , or skipping payments . If you realize the bang for the buck you can get with whole life insurance , and have the discipline to stick to a premium payment schedule , then you 'll be glad you bought this policy .
Term Life Insurance is a temporary policy with very few moving parts . It has no cash value ; pays no dividends ; can not be paid off early ; and when the term is up , it goes way up in price , or else the policy simply ends . As such , it also usually costs less per thousand dollars of coverage than Whole Life costs . Whole Life accumulates cash value that can be borrowed from , used to pay the policy premium in later years , or collected if the policy is surrendered . It may pay periodic dividends . Whole Life policy premiums can be paid over one 's lifetime , or in one single premium , or over a set number of years . The biggest difference between Term and Whole Life is that Whole Life is permanent insurance that will last your `` whole '' lifetime . With these features , Whole Life usually has a higher premium than Term Life , although it is possible that if you keep buying new Term policies throughout your life , the cumulative premium of Whole Life may be lower than the sum total of all the Term policies , especially if your health declined over the years .
I do n't think you can state whole life is actually better than term life insurance or term life insurance is better than whole life . It just depends on the need by you , the client . There are many different product options when it comes to life insurance . There is the right product for practically every situation . The true use of whole life is when there is a level premium need for life insurance your `` whole life '' hence the name . However , whole life insurance has become the Swiss Army knife of life insurance . The riders and cash value can be used for critical illness , terminal illness , children 's college funds to retirement benefits . There are now lots of uses for whole life insurance . Term life insurance is meant more to cover a need for a fixed amount of time . There are term limits that vary from annually to 5 years , 10 years , 15 years , 20 years , 25 years , 30 years and even 35 years . You may also set a premium on a universal life plan that does n't build cash value other than to level your premiums as far as age 151 years old . The main thing to consider which type of life insurance you need is to first identify your need for life insurance . A wise man once shared , you should buy life insurance like you will die tomorrow and invest like you will live forever . Find an experienced independent broker to help you identify your needs and shop the market for the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
That is a great question ! I have a great answer - it means that there is no more cost for your coverage , it is paid off ! There are a couple of ways that you have reached this great place . You might have purchased a policy that was structured to have higher premiums for a period of time , allowing the costs of the policy to be paid off more quickly than the traditional whole life policy would normally have . These policies are more expensive than the traditional whole life policy , but are perfect for someone who may be working , and not want to carry that monthly expense into retirement , yet still wants whole life coverage . For someone who wants to maximize retirement money , this may be a great financial decision . The other way that you might have gotten here is by converting an expiring term life policy . Often when a term policy reaches a point near its end date the option to convert your premiums paid over the life of the policy to payments on that company 's whole life policy that would most closely match your term policy in price . If you choose that option , then the company considers what you have paid on the term as the purchase price for a single payment on a whole life policy , and the face value is determined by that price . For example , I have a client whose $ 100,000 term policy allows him the option to convert it . If he chooses to do that , the premiums he would pay on the policy over the life of the term would purchase about $ 43,000 worth of whole life insurance that is paid up free and clear . He would have that coverage and not ever owe another penny on it . If you have any further questions , I hope you feel free to contact me and ask , I 'm happy to help . Thank you for asking your question !
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Driveways ?
Your homeowners insurance policy covers damages that are caused by specific perils . While it is possible that damage to a driveway could be caused by fire or another of the covered perils , I doubt that is the point of this question . Mostdriveway difficulties arise from earth movement and that is an excluded peril in most policies .
If the driveway is bulging , cracking or just plain going bad for various reasons homeowners insurance does not cover this type of damage . It is possible to have the driveway covered if damage was caused from a major fire which could of lead to thedamageof the driveway which would fall under other structure coverage . Consult your agent on the specific details of your potential loss or inquiry as your agent would be familar with the exact details andcoverage ` sof your policy
When you asked the question `` Does Homeowners Insurance cover driveway repair , '' ? It all depends on what caused the damage . It will not cover any repairs due to normal aging process . If your driveway is part of the main structure and the house was burnt down and needed to be rebuilt then the driveway may rebuilt . Just because your driveway is old and you need it repaired may not be cover . The key thing to remember is what caused the damage ? normal aging process or a covered peril ?
If the driveway is bulging , cracking or just plain going bad for various reasons homeowners insurance does not cover this type of damage . It is possible to have the driveway covered if damage was caused from a major fire which could of lead to thedamageof the driveway which would fall under other structure coverage . Consult your agent on the specific details of your potential loss or inquiry as your agent would be familar with the exact details andcoverage ` sof your policy
More than likely no because a driveway is not considered a covered `` structure '' under the Homeowners ' policy . Further , in many cases , driveway damage is caused by some form of settling of the earth under the pavement . Since earth movement tends to be a standard exclusion in a Homeowners policy , any damage resulting from that also would not be covered .
A HO-3 homeowners policy covers your driveway to an amount not to exceed the Coverage B limit . However , the insurance company generally does not pay for damage to a driveway caused by freezing , thawing or pressure or weight of ice or water whether driven by wind or not . Since the city is not responsible for the weather , I doubt that they would have any liability .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
If the driveway is simply cracking , bulging , sinking , being lifted by roots or just plain old wear then this would not be a covered peril . Depending on your homeowners policy you may have other structure coverage if the driveway is destroyed by fire and possible freezing . I recommend you call your agent to further discuss .
The standard homeowner policy only responds to unforeseen losses caused by covered perils . Therefore , a policyholder could expect his or her homeowner policy to cover damages caused by covered perils . For example , one of the most common covered causes of damages to a driveway might be ` damage caused by a vehicle ' . Of course , the deductible would be applied in the assessment of the amount of damages . Always think : What is the cause of the loss ? Then : Is it covered under my policy . Your independent insurance agent can help you determine coverage situations .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
A driveway would not typically be covered by a homeowners insurance policy . A homeowners insurance policy typically provides coverage for the main premise and other buildings that are located on the same land parcel as the premise . Please read your policy completely to under the coverage provided and any exclusions that may be contained within .
Your homeowners insurance policy covers damages that are caused by specific perils . While it is possible that damage to a driveway could be caused by fire or another of the covered perils , I doubt that is the point of this question . Mostdriveway difficulties arise from earth movement and that is an excluded peril in most policies .
The only instances that I am aware of claims being paid for paved driveways are when the damage is caused by a covered peril such as a tree falling and damaging it . I do n't think that rabbit tunnels and ant holes would be covered under any of the perils of a homeowner policy .
Your homeowners policy covers damage to your home and personal property caused by one of the named perils . It is difficult to imagine a situation where the policy would cover damage to a driveway , however , it could happen . The effects of animals are specifically excluded and would not apply here , I dont believe . You should not expect your insurance policy to pay for items that would fall under the classification of fair wear and tear .
The homeowners insurance policy is based on a formula . A certain amount of coverage -LRB- a percentage of the residence coverage -RRB- is the limit for fences and other structures that are not a part of the house . These include the fence , driveways , sidewalks and other fixtures and building materials located on your home site that are intended for construction purpose on your home . On your policy you can find the limit of coverage for these items under coverage B .
It is unlikely . It is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your particular policy of course . The policy does cover `` other structures '' on your property such as sheds , fences etc. retaining wall by it 's nature is build into the earth , however so the greatest potentai hazard that might cause damage to it is earth movement which is excluded in your policy . This is much the same situation with a patio or your driveway as each of those are also build directly into the earth . Now , that having been said , should any of these be damaged as a result of a negligent act of someone else , like a contractor whom you may have on your property working for you , there may be coverage under their commercial liability policy .
Your state probably requires that you have auto insurance before you drive out the dealers driveway . Your current policy may well provide coverage for a specified period of time -LRB- usually 30 days . -RRB- Many consider that free coverage . That is not the case as the policy on the newly acquired car will revert back to the date of purchase . The best idea is to provide the dealer with evidence of current coverage and then call your insurance agent with all the details including the VIN , the date of purchase , the price of the car and any coverage changes that are necessary . That way you are covered and that is really the issue .
Unfortunately there is no simple answer to your question . Federal employees have a wide variety of health insurance plan options made available to them at every Federal open enrollment season and these options vary depending upon the employee 's geographic location . My spouse is a Federal employee so I get stuck with reviewing the options for our family every year . As every person 's health care situation is unique , their financial resources vary and you may have a choice ranging from HMO 's to high deductible Health Savings Account based plans there simply is no one size fits all answer . If you have a strong preference for certain doctors , hospitals and pharmacies then determining which plan options have these providers in-network will be a good starting point . Next you will want to examine the cost sharing arrangements in the plans that have the providers you like . This is where looking into the plan 's deductible , co-insurance and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure plus any doctor and prescription copayment features comes into play . And , last but certainly not least , will be whatthe monthly premiums are for the finalist plans that have met all your other criteria . I wish I could make life simpler for you and just say choose Plan X but the Federal Government has gone to great lengths to provide its employees lots of plans to choose from at different price points so it really defies any simple answer . Kind of like if you asked me what car would be best for you and I said a Prius only to find out you need to tow a 24-foot boat to the lake every weekend - the Prius would get you good gas mileage but might not even pull that boat out of the driveway .
It may , it really depends on what caused the damage to your driveway in the first place . More than likely though the damage would not be covered . Please remember every policy is different . Read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that may be contained within .
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Which Homeowners Insurance Is Best ?
I really like Frank Lombards answer . I would just add that the company is important but certainly not critical . The essential elements that make a policy best are the relationship that you have with the agent and the limits that you select . You are choosing someone who you want to stand with you when the unimaginable occurs , chose well .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy is the one that is going to do what you want it to for what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Pay for any damage to your home ? The Best policy would guaranty your home would be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by any cause . All policies will have exclusions or limitations . The Best policy will have the fewest exclusions or limitations . Reimburse you for loss or damage to your personal property ? The Best policy will repair or replace -LRB- new for old -RRB- your property should it be damaged from any cause . Again , most policies will have exclusions and limitations , the Best policy will have the fewest exclusions and limitations . The Best policy will include a Personal Liability limit not less than $ 300,000 and offer a good Personal Umbrella should you need or want higher limits . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur and help you return to your pre-loss position . In my opinion , the Best policy will be the one that will do all the above for the most favorable premium .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
Homeowners Insurance in all States is designed to protect homes from covered perils which occur on a ` sudden and accidental basis ' . Termite damage does n't occur instantaneously ; it is something that deteriorates over time ; homes which are well maintained , inspected and treated against termites are highly unlikely to become infected or damaged . The same is true regarding dry rot , wet rot and slow and unrepaired water leaks . It is imperative for homes to be well maintained as homeowners insurance is not designed to provide monetary reimbursement for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of homes ; if this were the case , premium would be much greater than what we pay today . Sudden and Accidental is true regarding any covered incident by the homeowners insurance policy ; covered perils will include for example items such as Fire , Wind , Hail , Water Damage , Burglary etc. . . Each of these items would occur suddenly and accidentally . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It would be a good idea to obtain a copy of your State 's Homeowners Insurance Form and ask a licensed insurance representative to review the policy form for you and highlight the paragraphs most pertinent to the specific situation . Homeowners insurance coverage forms are not often updated and it may only be necessary to review the main points once to understand the purpose of the policy and coverage afforded .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
Amica Insurance Company is great for any of their products . Two of my former companies competed against them and we found them to be very ethical . They have an A.M Best rating of A + + which is the `` Superior '' financial strength rating given by Best . With specific regard to their homeowner product , for twelve consecutive years they have received the ` J.D. Power Award ' for `` Highest Customer Satisfaction Among National Homeowner Insurers '' . Hard to beat their track-record . I only wish they wrote homeowners here in Florida !
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
Home Insurance can be changed at any time . A homeowner can cancel his or her insurance at any time and purchase a policy from another carrier . The unearned portion of paid premium will be returned to the Insured in an expeditious manner . A bank or mortgage company is not permitted to require a homeowner to purchase insurance from any specific insurance company . For homes not insurable under Preferred Home Insurance Programs , there are some Sub-Standard Programs which will accept homes which are not in the best of repair or which are declared a high risk to carriers , in the absence of an insurance market for the home , most States have a Fair Plan which will accept the risk sometimes on a Fire Only basis . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Usually , but in a fairly limited way . If there is coverage , it will be for the named perils listed in the policy AND subject to your Homeowners ' Deductible . The coverage may also be limited to a specific dollar amount per piece . If you do have jewelry or other higher value items that you are concerned about , it is best to talk to you insurance professional about `` scheduling '' those items for coverage either on a homeowners ' `` rider '' or as a separate policy all together . There are a couple of advantages to this . First , the item will be covered to it 's appraised value as opposed to some significantly smaller amount . Second , when scheduled these items are usually then NOT subject to the homeowners ' deductible . Finally , in addition to the perils listed in the Homeowners policy , scheduled items are also covered for `` mysterious dissappearance '' which is much broader coverage . This means that there would be coverage even if the item was simply lost . If your diamond falls out of your engagement ring and the ring is scheduled , there would be coverage to replace the stone . There would be no such coverage under a standard Homeowners ' policy .
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
Let me put it to you this way , if I may . If you do n't have a mortgage -LRB- which would require you to have and maintain a Homeowners ' policy -RRB- , and you are fortunate enough to have the complete financial where with all to fully rebuild your home if it were totally destroyed , and fully replace all of your belongings at the same time , you do n't need Homeowners Insurance . LIkewise , if you were financially sound enough to settle any law suit that might be launched against you as a result of the serious injury or death of another person or damage to their property caused by you and for which you are then legally liable , you do n't need Homeowners Insurance . Talk to your Insurance Professional . A well thought out and executed Homeowners policy would provide coverage for you for these types of potential losses for literally pennies on the dollar . Why do you need it ? The question is why would you not want it ?
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Homeowners Insurance will cover any home fixtures against perils covered by the policy ; i.e. Fire , Vandalism , Wind etc. . . If your quetsion refers to the maintenance or repair of your heating system , your question should be referred to your Home Warranty coverage and not your homeowners insurance . In very few cases , homeowners insurance policies may offer a warranty endorsement which can be purchased and added on to your homeowners insurance policy . You must consult your present insurance carrier and inquire as to whether a home warranty endorsement is available and the premium charged .
We will begin to answer this question with the following caution : when one asks about a policy being ` cheaper ' than another -LRB- especially when it is the first question asked -RRB- , the immediate concern arises regarding the lack of importance of the coverage which is the primary reason for purchasing the insurance . To answer the question correctly , Homeowners Insuranceand Landlords Insuranceare not related in any way other than to provide property coverage on a similar dwelling . TheHomeowners Insurance policy is defined and writtenfor the Owner Occupied home of the titled owner of the property ; the Landlords Insurance policy is defined and written for the Tenant Occupedhome of the titled owner of the property . Each policy contract contains an Occupancy Clause stating the occupancy of thedwelling insured . We have witnessed large losses which have been denied by carriers due to the occupancy not matching the policy purpose . Therefore , if you have a tenant occupied home , you will need to purchase a Landlords Policy and if you are seeking to insure your primary home , you should purchase a Homeowners Policy . The LandlordsPolicy statistically poses a greater risk factor to the insurance company ; however generally , the LandlordsPolicy does not provide coverage for personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- and provides a more limited form of Liability Coverage listed as Premises OnlyLiability . Now , regarding cost , the premium is specific to the carrier 's experience with each type of policy.There are insurance carriers that have a much worse historic experience on tenant occupied properties ; thus , the Landlords Policy would be rated as a higher risk than the Homeowners Policy . However , in most cases , for the same Dwelling Coverage amount , we find that the Landlords Policy Premium islower than the Homeowners Policy . Awise word to the public would be to purchase the correct coverage for the application since if a futureclaim is denied based on the incorrect policy form being purchased , the whole purpose of the insurance is void and unnecessary . For more information regaring Homeowners Insurance , please click the following link : WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
health-insurance
Which Short Term Health Insurance Is Best ?
Short-term health insurance is the cheapest type of medical coverage available to individuals and families . Rates are typically 40 % -75 % less than conventional coverage , although you can not receive a federal subsidy and temporary plans are not ACA-compliant . Also , pre-existing conditions are not covered . As an experienced broker , we help consumers with their short-term policy comparisons each day . Our top-rated websites allow customers to view rates in moments , and easily apply online for coverage . Comparing and finding the cheapest prices takes less than two minutes . Typically , within 24 hours , you are approved for a period of 1-12 months , depending on which time-period you selected . Often , UnitedHealthcare , Blue Cross and a few smaller carriers offer the most competitive rates . Underwriting is simple , consisting of a short application , but no physicals and few medical questions .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
First , check with your college 's office of student affairs or administration and see if they have a student health insurance plan . Due to the requirements of ObamaCare many of these plans have been cancelled or are being phased out but some do still exist . Next , you can be covered as a dependent on your parent 's health insurance policy until age 26 so if you have recently lost or will be losing coverage when you start school you could possibly be added onto their plan . Regarding true major medical individual health insurance you are pretty well locked out until the next open enrollment period starting on November 15th and the earliest you could be covered would be January 1 , 2015 . This is unless you have what is called a change of life status event -LRB- marriage , divorce , child birth or adoption , losing other coverage -RRB- in which case you have a 60-day time frame to apply for individual health insurance coverage . If you are in good health and coverage for any pre-existing health conditions is not a major concern for you then the best solution for immediate coverage would be to apply for a short term medical insurance policy . These policies are pretty affordable and depending upon the insurance carrier they may issue a policy that runs for a period just short of one year and you can often reapply for coverage . If you reside in Tennessee , Arkansas or Mississippi contact me and I 'll be happy to help you out with this . If you reside in another state seek out a health insurance broker or go online and do a search for Short Term Medical . Assurant Health and United Healthcare/Golden Rule have pretty good short term policies and , of course , you would want to check with the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan in your state . Other than Medicaid that pretty well sums up your options as a student .
Short Term disability Insurance pays a percentage of your salary if you become temporarily disabled , meaning that you are not able to work for a short period of time due to a sickness or injury -LRB- excluding on-the-job-injuries , which are covered by workers compensation insurance -RRB- . A typical short-term disability insurance policy provides you with 40 to 65 percent of your pre-disability base salary , according to the Life and Health Insurance Foundation for Education . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners estimates that these benefits generally last between three to six months . Most short-term disability insurance policies have a `` cap '' , meaning you receive a maximum benefit amount per month . Short-term disability insurance policies also have a limit on the amount of times that you can receive benefits-up to two years , according to the Insurance Information Institute . .
The general answer to your question is `` Yes . '' Though the renewal policy varies from insurance carrier to insurance carrier and may also be impacted by insurance department requirements in your state . Most short term medical policies can be renewed at least once and with some carriers and in some states perhaps up to three times . As a consequence of rising health insurance rates for ObamaCare compliant individual major medical policies for persons who qualify for little or no premium subsidies in the government health insurance marketplaces the interest in Short Term Major Medical plans has increased significantly . Insurance carriers have been modifying their Short Term Medical policies to take advantage of this opportunity and so there are many more options being made available and being offered for longer terms -LRB- some up to 11 months -RRB- than has historically been the case in this product segment . Short Term Major Medical insurance can be an affordable option for individuals who can pass relatively simple underwriting screening and who have no pre-existing condition concerns . A person considering this option should seek the services of an insurance broker who represents multiple carriers and who can help you find the policy best suited to your needs . You should also be aware that a Short Term Major Medical Plan does not qualify as minimum essential coverage under the terms of the Affordable Care Act and that you will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 95 or 1 % of your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- on your 2014 taxes . However , this penalty can only be recovered from a tax refund and the premium savings may far outweigh any potential tax penalty some individuals might be faced with .
Job loss is always a unsettling period in our lives and having to address your health insurance concerns only compounds things . The first thing you should look into is the feasibility of continuing your coverage through your former employer 's health plan under either your state 's continuation of coverage provisions or , if your employer has 20 + employees , under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . Unless you were terminated with cause your former employer should have provided you with information regarding your rights in this area . If you have a spouse who is employed and has health insurance coverage available through their employer this is a qualifying event for you to be added as a dependent on your spouse 's plan or for you and your spouse to both enroll in the spouse 's employer 's health plan if you had both been enrolled under your former employer 's health plan . If your spouse has access to coverage through their employer this will almost certainly make you ineligible for subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Some people , especially those with family coverage , may find paying the entire premium for the former employer 's health plan to be cost prohibitive or may not want to continue be covered under it for other reasons . Losing coverage from an employer 's group health plan is a `` Qualifying Event '' that grants you a `` Special Election Period '' under the Affordable Care Act . You have a 60-day window after losing coverage to purchase individual health insurance either directly from an insurance carrier or through the state or Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in your state . The only good reason to purchase your coverage through a government health insurance marketplace is if your income level for 2015 would qualify you for a premium subsidy and possibly for cost sharing reductions . Currently a person 's qualification for these subsidies is based upon the applicant 's projected FAMILY income for all of 2015 . So , your situation is not an uncomplicated one . SEEK OUT AN EXPERIENCED HEALTH INSURANCE BROKER WHO REPRESENTS MULTIPLE INSURANCE CARRIERS AND WHO IS LICENSED TO SELL COVERAGE IN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE FOR GUIDANCE ON THESE MATTERS . If you are in good health and pre-existing condition coverage is not a concern for you , then in the event that the options I 've listed above do n't fit your financial needs , you can consider Short Term Major Medical insurance coverage as bridge coverage if you anticipate getting another job in the weeks or months ahead . These policies are usually less expensive -LRB- sometimes significantly so -RRB- than the options discussed above and can provide protection from financial ruin in the event an illness or injury occurs while the Short Term Medical policy is in effect . PLEASE NOTE : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty so there could be tax ramifications if you are covered under such a policy for more than 90-days . This does not mean that a Short Term Medical policy is an option you should not consider but it is an option that you should choose only with a full understanding of the positives and negatives associated with this choice . Which is another reason you should seek the guidance of an experienced Health Insurance Broker .
Short term life insurance is generally thought of as term life insurance that comes in terms of 1 , 5 or 10 years . One year Term , or Annually Renewable Term , can be helpful for someone in between jobs or some other need for very short term coverage . However , one year Term will go up in price each year , and sometimes you need to re-qualify every year . So locking in a longer term is much easier and more cost effective if you need more than a couple years of coverage . Five year Term is hard to find , and thus the prices are not as competitive as one would think . I have found that ten year Term rates often run as low or lower than five year Term . Since there is no penalty to drop Term life insurance , you may as well take the longer term and then just drop it if you do n't need it the whole ten years . Ten year Term policies are common and competitively priced . Again , if you need longer coverage , it can cost less to lock the rate in longer while you are younger and your health is good . But if you are going for short term coverage , 10 or 15 year Term can be a good way to go .
There are several companies that sell short term disability . If your employer does not offer a short term plan you do have options . Many of the health insurance carriers as well as life insurance carriers offer both short term and long term disability plan . You can search the internet for them or I recommend using an experienced independent disability broker to professional shop the market to find you the best product at the best rate for your unique situation .
Short term disability insurance pays a percentage of your salary for a specified amount of time if you are ill or injured and can not perform the duties of your occupation . Please note , you may be required to use up your sick days -LRB- if applicable -RRB- before your short term disability coverage will start making payments . If you have short term coverage , you may want to consider supplementing it with long termdisabilityinsurance as many people who need to use their short term disability coverage will often be unable to work for longer than the short term plan allows . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your disability insurance program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
Short term disability insurance is paycheck protection in case of a disability event . And many consumers can only afford short term disability versus long term disability coverage . Mutual of Omaha is a major carrier in short term disability insurance . Keep in mind that you may have short term disability insurance through your employers group benefit plan . You also have Social Security disability insurance , although benefits may be limited .
Yes , you can . There is some chance the college/university you are attending offers a student health insurance plan though these are becoming increasingly rare because of their general inability to meet the requirements of ObamaCare . If you are under age 26 you can still be covered as a dependent on your parent 's group or individual health insurance policy . You can apply for individual health insurance coverage either through a government health insurance marketplace or from an insurance broker and/or insurance carrier outside of the government marketplace -LRB- please note that depending upon your circumstances you may not be eligible to enroll for individual coverage until the next open enrollment period beginning November 15th for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest -RRB- . And finally , you may want to consider applying for a short term major medical insurance policy . Short term medical policies do have a few underwriting questions , you can be declined for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . These limitations aside , for a healthy young person a short term medical policy may be the most cost effective solution to protecting yourself against future accidents or illnesses . You would be well served to seek out an experienced health insurance broker to assist you in finding the best solution for your needs and budget .
The cheapest life insurance is usually annually renewable term , followed by 10 year term . Annually renewable term goes up in price every year , and 10 year term goes up in price every 10 years . Some companies carry 5 year term , but there are so few choices that 10 year term rates often beat the rates of 5 year term . Whether that type of short term policy is best for you depends on your need for the life insurance . E.g. . If you are purchasing it to pay for your funeral , you run the very real risk of being unable to afford the policy by the time you die . In that case , buying permanent insurance is usually a better choice , even if it starts out costing more . However , if you only need your policy for a few years , getting a short term policy is most likely your best and cheapest choice .
Which are the best life insurance policies ? Short answer is the one that is in-force the day you die , as that 's the only thing that matters on that day , is an in-force policy . Now if you 're asking what 's the best policy for short term , say 10-20 years with no need beyond , term would most likely be the answer . 20 years plus ? Whole life would be the best . If you 've waited to late middle age and find that you still need life insurance for the long haul , universal life would probably be the answer . There is no best choice for everything .
My sick sense of humor almost tempts me to say `` No , real estate agents are specifically excluded from getting health insurance by law '' but I wo n't do that . Yes , you can get health insurance . What you do for a living has no bearing on your eligibility for health insurance , especially now that ObamaCare is in full effect regarding guaranteed issuance of policies . In my experience , most real estate agents are self-employed/1099 contractor status people and not W2 employees of an agency . So , this probably means that you will need to get individual health insurance either through your state 's government health insurance marketplace or outside of it . So , just like you would tell those `` For Sale By Owner '' folks , you need to seek out an experienced health insurance agent who can assist you in obtaining coverage . If you have been without health insurance for more than 60-days and have n't had what is called a `` change of life status event '' -LRB- marriage , divorce , childbirth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- then you are in a time frame where you would be ineligible for enrollment in true major medical insurance until the next annual open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 and the earliest your coverage could go into effect would be for January 1st , 2015 . I hate to be the one to deliver this news but that is how ObamaCare works . Your only coverage option to carry you through until then would be to take out a Short Term Medical insurance plan . There are a variety of short term medical plan options available . However , you need to be aware that short term medical plans do still use limited underwriting questions , can decline a person for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . Please feel free to contact me if you need advice or assistance in this matter .
Short term medical insurance provides benefits to the insured for specified period of time . Here are a few things to note about Short Term medical coverage : Term is 1-12 months Pre exisitng conditions are not covered . Typically catastrophic coverage in nature . Must be in the US . Can not be currently pregnant . Short term in an excellent solution for people inbetween jobs , recent graduates , an alternative to COBRA or for those that can not afford 2014 reform rates . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized short term medical quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
How do you define cheap ? In 2014 the average monthly cost for a Silver level ObamaCare compliant major medical plan was $ 328 . By that standard any coverage costing less than that would be `` cheap '' . People who qualify for little or no subsidy of their individual health insurance -LRB- shame on you for making more than $ 42,000 annually -RRB- may argue that $ 328 or more per month for health insurance is n't affordable much less cheap . But the folks in Washington , D.C. know better about these things than you do . Some people who are healthy and are low consumers of health care services have turned to Short Term Medical plans as a more affordable option for health insurance coverage . And , indeed this may work out well for some people as Short Term Medical policies are generally cheaper than individual major medical policies . However , before pursuing this strategy you do need to be aware that Short Term Medical plans do n't cover pre-existing conditions , usually do n't cover preventive care , may not cover prescription drugs and may have other limitations . Also , they do not meet the criteria under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual coverage mandate and therefore can leave you vulnerable to a tax penalty for noncompliance . You should seek out an experienced health insurance agent to discuss your needs and options and to fully understand whatever health insurance product it is that you purchase .
Before shopping for short term disability insurance , first determine if your employer 's group benefit plan offers it . If your an executive or key person in the company , you may ask for short term disability insurance to be added to your compensation package . Short term disability benefits usually is designed for two years . Short term disability is paycheck protection against illness or injury recovery .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Does Long Term Disability Insurance Cover ?
Long term disability insurance covers prolonged periods of illness and injury by generating tax free income from the benefits of the policy . Benefits do not begin until the elimination or waiting period has been satisfied . Protecting your income when you ca n't work is an important part of defensive planning .
Long term disability insurance is an insurance policy that is designed to cover lost income in case of an illness or injury so severe that a person can no longer perform the duties of their current occupation . You may use the benefits to pay your household expenses during this time of disability . These policies can be written from a couple of years of benefits paid all the way out to age 67 years old .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Some things to consider when buying disability insurance are : 1 -RRB- Do you want short term disability insurance , or long term disability insurance , or both ? Long term disability is recommended if you can not afford both , as the effects of being unable to work for many months or years is the most devastating . 2 -RRB- How much -LRB- what % -RRB- of your income do you wish to replace ? It usually makes sense to get as much as you can . 3 -RRB- Do you want to spend more to have Own Occupation feature ? If not , you will need to go back to work when you can do any job . With `` own occ '' you will be paid until you can go back to your own occupation . 4 -RRB- What about Residual Disability ? Getting a policy that offers Residual Disability enables you to receive a partial benefit based proportionate to the amount of income lost when able to resume working part time -LRB- unlike Partial Disability , which just pays a set % -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What does your policy cover ? Make sure it covers illness and injury , and review the conditions covered .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is : What does term life insurance cover ? Remember first of all , if we 're using term , it only covers that period in time . If you buy a 20-year term , as an example , it 's only going to cover you for 20 years . If you buy $ 1/2 million dollars of death benefit , you 'll have it for as long as you pay your premiums on time ; you 'll have that coverage . What is it good for ? How does it cover ? It 's going to cover anything that you think that you need . Let 's say , at $ 1/2 million , you had a mortgage at $ 250,000 , you had credit card debt , you had car debt , you had educational debt . You want to cover that so that your spouse or your beneficiaries will not be actually saddled with your debt if something happened to you . When I 'm looking at , ` What does term life insurance ? ' it 's the time zone , how long do I have , what obligations would I have , and how can I relieve my beneficiaries from any of those obligations if something happens to me ?
Under your current situation I would not carry the old disability policy . Disability insurance is a coordinated product in the sense that any number of policies will not pay more than the maximum scheduled amount usually no greater than 70 % The only reason to carry two different disability insurance policies is if you purchase a short term and a long term disability insurance policy . The long term policy may have an extended elimination period of 90 days or 180 days before benefits commence . A short term disability plan can commence within in days and pay benefits up to the elimination period of the long term plan . What you are describing sounds like two long term disability plan and would not make financial sense to keep the other policy .
No these are two totally separate types of insurance plans used to cover totally different needs . Disability insurance can be either long term or short term . Long term disability is used to replace your income for the rest of your working life . It usually has a bit longer elimination period 90-180-360 days before benefits begin to pay . The benefits can pay as long as age 67 when social security benefits start . A short term disability insurance plan pays benefits sooner within days , but only lasts a few months or up to a couple of years . Both disability insurance plans are insuring most peoples most valuable asset , their ability to earn a living . Disability insurance should be purchased when a person starts working for a living . Long term care insurance is meant to cover a person that can no longer care for themselves . The person needs home health care , assisted living or a nursing home . Usually the time to purchase a long term care policy is when a person gets older , typically in their 50s or 60s , but some wait until their 70s . It really depends more upon their health and lifestyle . Just do n't wait until you have been diagnosed with an affliction , then is too late .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Actually , long term disability insurance and long term care insurance are not the same type of policy nor do they cover the same things . Disability insurance is to replace a percentage of your income when you have an illness or injury so severe you can no longer work . Long term care insurance is primarily for your aging years to cover home health , assisted living and nursing homes when you are no longer able to take care of yourself . Long term disability insurance should be purchased at a young age as soon as you go to work earning a wage . Long term care insurance should be purchased between your late 50s or early 60s .
Nope . Long-term care insurance provides financial protection against the cost of having assistance with your daily life . For example , someone living in an assisted living facility or a nursing home has long-term care that is needed because without the assistance of others , they would not be able to live comfortably and would face difficulty getting around and taking care of themselves . Long-term care is typically most utilized by elder and retired persons . Long-term disability insurance refers to providing an income to you in the event you develop a disability that inhibits your ability to work in your field -LRB- make sure to check the definition of disability in your policy to see what qualifies as a disability - this can vary by company -RRB- . For example , if you 're a surgeon and develop a condition that affects your ability to perform surgery , that condition would affect your ability to earn an income in your field . To protect against the loss of income , a long-term disability policy would provide an income to you while you recover or transition to another occupation - again , this is where the `` definition of disability '' is critical . If you need assistance with your coverage , please feel free to send me an e-mail via the contact me button or give me a call . I 'm happy to help and there are no fees for my assistance . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Interesting question . Makes me wonder if the above answers address what you meant to ask . So the points covered above are mostly what term life insurance does cover . What term life insurance does NOT cover is the risk of death after so many years as specified in the contract . Hence the `` Term '' In the name . Also term insurance ca n't be purchased for a person of 80 or the latest 85 years of age . Term insurance has no cash value so it does n't `` cover '' the need for a guaranteed tax-free growth of wealth like a Whole Life Insurance can . Term insurance ca n't `` cover '' the need for retirement income supplement like Whole Life can . As mentioned above no insurance including Term will cover suicide in the first two years of the policy . And of course also as mentioned above there is a contestability period with all life insurance to mitigate deliberate misinformation in order to obtain a policy . If fraud is proved on a claim within the contestability period the claim will be denied .
The two main types of disability insurance are short term disability , and long term disability insurance . Short term disability insurance pays fairly quickly after a disabling illness or injury occurs , and benefits generally last no longer than two years . Long term disability insurance has a longer waiting period until it pays , usually around 90 days . Then it can last a number of years or all the way to retirement in the event of a disability that continues that long .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability Insurance may cover maternity leave if it is provided as a Group Short Term Disability plan and if the insured has met the criteria for qualifying for a claim related to maternity and childbirth . Private Short Term Disability does not cover maternity leave , nor does Long Term Disability Insurance , whether purchased privately or provided in a group plan . However , complications of pregnancy and childbirth are usually covered .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Get Blue Cross Health Insurance ?
Blue Cross operates under several names around the country so the exact carrier that you would be purchasing it through depends on where you live -LRB- e.g. Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield , CareFirst Blue Cross Blue Shield , etc. -RRB- . You can buy the health insurance during the annual open enrollment period -LRB- starts in November this year -RRB- - if you have a qualifying event , you can purchase health insurance under a special enrollment period . I always recommend buying your health insurance through a broker as there are many products to choose from making the process of buying coverage confusing and very time consuming - insurance brokers do not charge fees for their services so you can only help yourself . If you prefer to do it on your own , you can complete the process through the health insurance exchanges via healthcare.gov . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
How Employer Health Insurance started ? 1920-1930 : The Rising Price of Medical Care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . The AHA designed the Blue Cross guidelines so as to reduce price competition among hospitals . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield The market for health insurance exploded in size in the 1940s , growing from a total enrollment of 20 million in 1940 to nearly 142 million in 1950 . During WWII there was a wage freeze however the Federal government permitted employees to provide benefits instead of wages . Companies began offering health insurance to employees and the employer sponsored health insurance market exploded .
In the 1920 's changes occurred that tended to increase the role that medicine played in people 's lives and to shift the focus of treatment from homes to hospitals . These changes caused the price of medical care to rise because of : Advances in medical technology Growing acceptance of medicine as a science Development of hospitals as treatment centers Encouragement for sick people to visit physicians and hospitals . Licensing and standards of care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield . That is where health insurance began
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
Usually life insurance is sold by a blue cross blue shield organization affliiated company only in a group plan format . . By affiliated company , I mean a private company associated with Blue Cross Blue Shield as there may be some restrictions on the Blue Cross Blue Shield organization that prevents direct sales .
Blue Cross operates under several names around the country so the exact carrier that you would be purchasing it through depends on where you live -LRB- e.g. Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield , CareFirst Blue Cross Blue Shield , etc. -RRB- . You can buy the health insurance during the annual open enrollment period -LRB- starts in November this year -RRB- - if you have a qualifying event , you can purchase health insurance under a special enrollment period . I always recommend buying your health insurance through a broker as there are many products to choose from making the process of buying coverage confusing and very time consuming - insurance brokers do not charge fees for their services so you can only help yourself . If you prefer to do it on your own , you can complete the process through the health insurance exchanges via healthcare.gov . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Blue Cross Blue Shield offers life insurance to be added onto a health insurance policy that was purchased from Blue Cross Blue Shield , in some states . The Life face amount offered to add onto the Health policy is fairly small and the type of coverage offered is Term Life insurance .
With healthcare reform finding Health Insurance in North Carolina has become more challenging . While there are several companies that offer non-compliant plans outside the exchange . Only 2 offer exchange plans . Blue Cross and Blue Shield of NC and Coventry , of these Blue Cross and Blue Shieldis the only one offered statewide .
Blue Cross is an organization that is focused on health insurance . In some states Blue Cross Blue Shield offers Life Insurance through affiliate companies . It is usually an add on to their health insurance offerings . You should check with your local Blue Cross Blue Shield agent to see if the offer life insurance in your state .
Most national carriers issue policies using a national network and can be continued even if you move to another state . Blue Cross plans are an exception . If you have a Blue Cross plan and change your residence to another state you must apply for a new health insurance plan . You can apply for coverage from Blue or another carrier .
Medicare Plus Blue PPO is a Medicare Supplemental Plan insurance provider in Michigan . It is an arm of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Blue Care Network of Michigan . To find out more about the health insurance offered by Medicare Plus Blue PPO visit their website at WEBSITELINK .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
In Australia , a blue Medicare card is an interim card issued to individuals or families eligible for Medicare in that country . Some people in the United States may call a Medicare Supplement card from Blue Cross Blue Shield a blue Medicare card . However , Medicare cards in the US are red white and blue .
Health insurance in New York will vary depending on many variables , including how old you are , where you live , the number of members in your family and the coverage you want . BlueCross Blue Shield , Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield , UnitedHealthcare/Oxford and Emblem Health are a few of the major carriers . As an experienced broker , we offer free quotes in minutes -LRB- as do most other brokers -RRB- so that consumers can quickly compare the best plans from top-rated insurers . In 2014 , federal tax subsidies will reduce costs for many Americans . This could impact your premium as well as the benefits of the policy that is purchased .
Some Blue Cross plans will write life insurance , usually through a sister company . In South Carolina life insurance policies are issued through Companion Life Insurance Company . In Georgia , life insurance policies are written by Greater Georgia Life Insurance Company , Some Blue Cross companies are stock carriers , others are mutual , and a few are not-for-profit companies .
The Pennsylvania Health Insurance Exchange is the Marketplace where Pa residents can purchase affordable healthcare with the help of a federal subsidy -LRB- if you qualify -RRB- . Individuals , families and businesses can obtain a wide variety of plans from top-rated carriers such as Independence Blue Cross , Highmark , UPMC , Geisinger , Capital Blue Cross and many others . Experienced brokers -LRB- and their websites -RRB- can help consumers find the lowest rates and choose the most appropriate plan . Pahealthinsurancecoverage.com is one of the premier trusted health insurance websites in the state for providing current and cost-saving information , free quotes and assistance navigating through the application process . Pre-existing conditions will be covered and no medical questions will be asked -LRB- part of the Affordable Care Act legislation -RRB- and Open Enrollments will take place every year .
The term `` best '' is a subjective term . I do n't feel there are any `` best '' companies since most will pay their claims . A lot depends on the are you live in as far as what plans are offered . United Health Care is one of the largest in the world and is very competitive in most area 's . Humana has a good reputation as well as Aetna . Medical Mutual and Blue Cross are also very good . I look at the larger stable companies . There are some smaller companies that are good as well . No company is perfect and you will have complaints from friends and neighbors or the internet about all of them . My favorites would be United Health Care , Anthem Blue Cross -LRB- if available in your area -RRB- Medical Mutual , and Aetna .
Blue Cross is an insurance carrier . In most states Blue will write Medicare supplement plans and in some areas they will offer MAPD -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- plans . When you have original Medicare you can buy a Medigap plan from Blue or any other carrier . Blue MAPD plans are a form of privatized Medicare .
Compensation varies among states , insurers and producers themselves . For example , a broker in New Jersey that sells only Blue Cross plans will not be compensated the same as a broker in Ohio that sells only Anthem Blue Cross and Medical Mutual Of Ohio plans . Also , as of 2014 , when State Exchanges are operational , broker compensation is expected to reduce , although ironically , their expert and unbiased advice and guidance will be needed more than ever .
The first thing you need to do is get a health insurance license . You can be an independent agent and contract direct with the carriers such as Blue Cross Blue Shield , Humana , Aetna , United Health Care an Assurant . You wo n't get your commissions cut by partnering with a IMO -LRB- Independent Marketing Organization . You must also get certified to offer plans through the healthcare.gov website You will have to develop and invest into different lead sources so that you have a steady flow of leads .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can Health Insurance Companies Raise Your Rates ?
Health insurance companies can indeed raise your rates ... but only if they increase rates for everyone else in your group . You can never be singled out for a rate increase due to your claims . When carriers increase rates it is because claims for everyone with the same policy class have risen to the point that premiums no longer support the claim level .
Great question ! Unfortunately , that is a tough question to answer without a little more information from you . There are many reasons why your rates may increase within the state mandated rate limits . Some things that can raise your rates are a result of how you drive . A claim filed for an ` at fault ' accident can raise your rate , as can a poor driving record , or speeding tickets , in some cases . -LRB- You are a bigger risk for a payout , so you pay more , just as someone who smokes pays more for life insurance - smoking has been proven to increase your health risks , and bad driving habits increase your risk for an accident . -RRB- Some things are not in your control - rates can increase if the vehicle theft rate in your area increases , if the company has had to pay out significant claims , and their profits are down , or you move into a different age category in some cases . Some companies will even look at your creditworthiness as a basis for your rates . The purpose of insurance is n't to provide you with a steady rate as much as it is to help you in the event that you are in a position where the cost to repair or replace a car is more than you can afford . That said , there are some companies that will offer `` first accident forgiveness '' types of policies , and are a bit more lenient in their rate changes . I 'd tell you that if you are unhappy with your current rate to shop around and see if there is a better company or rate that fits your budget . If you have further questions , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Sorry for the unpleasant answer , but I appreciate you asking !
That is an excellent question , and one that I get asked a lot ! There are a couple of things that you can do to get your insurance rate lowered . The best is to continue to have a claim and ticket free driving record . If your record is clean , many companies will offer a discount . If yours does n't then tell them you are going to drop the policy and switch , and see if that will motivate them to work with you on the rate , or to match the rate of the company you will switch to . -LRB- many will -RRB- . Another way is to add your other policies to your auto insurer 's company . Having multiple cars or policies with the same company will result usually in substantial discounts on all of the policies . The last way , and one I caution you on , is to raise the amount of your deductible . If it is $ 500 now , and you can afford to pay a $ 1000 if you need to , then raise it to $ 750 or $ 1,000 , and get a lower rate . If you 'd have a hard time coming up with $ 500 , I 'd not advise raising it , especially if you 've filed claims before . Ask your agent to help , they are good that way , and thank you for asking !
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Since I 've been around , it seem like all companies raise rates all the time . It is a good rule of thumb to shop your rates every 5 years . I say 5 years as the next company will give you a better rate since you stayed with your last company for at least 5 years . All insurance companies must file their rates with the states insurance department before they raise them , but they keep going up just like everything else . Keep your driving record clean and your credit good and you should have good rates .
When shopping for Medicare Supplement do not just go by rates . Many agents will tell you that all plans are the same and the only difference is rates , and that is true . However , I have seen many companies go in to an area with rates that are low , only to raise the rates by 30 % or more the following year . Unless you like changing plans every year and you know your health will always be good , this is not necessarily the best way to go . Look for a company that is competitive , but that has a good history of rate increases , generally less than 10 % . Every agent is getting solicited by companies wanting them to sell their now lowest rate plan . Find a good local agent who has been around for a while . I personally like the AARP Med Sup . It is competitive and has an excellent rate history . It also uses community rating versus attained age rating . With attained age , which most companies use , you pay a low rate at first but every year you can count on a rate increase just because you got older , in addition to the rate increase the company has . With community rating , the rates are equaled over the ages so that you pay a little more at 65 for example but when you are 85 your rates will be lower than if you went with an attained age company . Also look for an agent that also does Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug plans . He will be able to help you decide which would be to your best advantage .
Most homeowners policies have an annual adjustment for the increased costs of construction . This raises the limits in the policy which also raises the premium . With each passing year the home grows older and that also affects the premium . Companies often reward customers who do not have claims and those discounts can have a substantial effect on your premium . Occasionally companies will file for and receive from the state insurance commissioner permission to raise the rates in a specific area due to losses that exceed the premiums received .
You can purchase a Medigap policy on line , direct from the company , or through an agent . The premium will be the same no matter which you choose . I recommend using an experienced agent familiar with all of the plans available in your area . When choosing a plan do not just go by rates alone . While the coverage is the same because plans have been standardized , some companies have a history of going into a state with very low rates and then within two years raise the raise 30 -60 % . If you do n't mind changing plans every year and your health remains good then you might save a little money initially , but in the long run it could cost you money . Find a competitive plan that has a history of stable rates . A good agent can help you with that .
A health insurance premium is the total monthly cost calculated by an insurance company for a particular plan of health insurance benefits . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- individual and small group health insurance rates will be derived from a rate table for the health insurance plan selected and based upon the age of the policyholder , their spouse -LRB- if they are covering one -RRB- and the first three children -LRB- if they are covering any -RRB- that will be covered . For example , for the cost for a health plan selected by a husband age 30 and his wife age 28 is $ 300 per month for a 30 year old and $ 275 for a 28 year old , their total monthly premium would be $ 575 per month -LRB- $ 300 + $ 275 -RRB- . The only other variable that can impact rates -LRB- depending upon the health insurance company 's underwriting policies -RRB- could be whether the person -LRB- s -RRB- to be covered use tobacco products . ObamaCare does allow for health insurance rates to be raised to account for tobacco use .
Because of the affordable care act insurance companies must cover everyone regardless of their health . This will increase claims . The companies must also cover pregnancy for all women which is an increased exposure in many cases . Companies can no longer charge according to age , the rates will be determined by community rating . As a result younger people will have their rates go up while some older people may have their rates go down . All of this increased exposure means more claims . The companies will be forced to raise rates to keep solvent .
I agree with Cathy , but also offer one other major reason rates go up . Insurers are pricing a product before they know their cost . It something like building a spec house for sale at $ 300,000 with out knowing that the purchaser is going to require all hard wood floors , a finished basement and a three car garage . Had you known you would have priced your product at $ 400,000 . This is some of the dilemma of insurers . Thy can look at historical outcomes and yet may not see a trend developing before it happens . The reason most auto insurance is sold in Six month terms in the US , is that it often takes a minimum of one year for the carrier to realize rate level on all customers in a certain state and rate filing . Let me give an example : If company A sees it needs rate increase on its TX auto insurance business and puts that rate into effect after state approval on July 1,2014 it will take a full six months to raise the rate level to the new level for the last customer whose policy incepts on 12/31/2014 . Then it takes the company another 6 months to earn the premium for each of those customers . It has to set aside some money in case you decide to move your business , as well as keep reserves for accidents that have occurred or are known to be likely to occur in the future.So in a full year at 7/1/2015 the company has realized the effects of its rate filing in the state . If it now needs more funds , it will take the same 12 months to fully earn that premium . So in effect you can see that the process of getting an adequate rate for an insurers losses and expected losses is at least a year on six month polices and double that to two years to achieve the rate level on annual policies . That said , recognize that your rates can go up annually in a 12 month policy because of a company 's filings and go up as much as every six months for an insurer who uses 6 moth policies.So , all that said , you do n't control the pricing that is an aggregate need of the insurer but you can better protect yourself by buying a 12 month policy . Lock in a rate level . If you do not change the exposure -LRB- new car or new operators and such -RRB- , you will have locked in rate for one whole year . So my advice is to seek out an insurer that writes annual policies if available .
Mild , seasonal asthma that has been under control for many years will generally not have an impact on life insurance rates . Moderate asthma with occasional attacks and requiring daily medication will generally raise rates a little . Severe asthma requiring continual steroid treatment and exhibiting recent , frequent attacks can raise life insurance premiums significantly . If smoking or COPD is involved along with severe asthma , it could result in a decline .
The rate of return of annuities really depends on what type of annuity you are talking about . Fixed Annuities have a set base rate similar to a CD , they pay a guaranteed rates of interest . If you are looking for a fixed annuity make sure you shop around some companies like Fidelity & Guaranty Life and Guaranty Income Life are raising their base rates . When you are looking at Index Annuities the insurance company gives you a guaranteed minimum interest rate and also a crediting strategy like the S&P 500 or something like that . Think of it this way there are two buckets of money , the first has your money with the guaranteed interest rate , the second has your money linked to the crediting strategy of the market . If the market goes up they will credit that bucket with interest -LRB- every company has different participation rates and caps -RRB- . If the market is down then that bucket will earn no interest . When ever you want to start drawing an income , the insurance company will see which bucket has the most money and that bucket will be used for income . If you work with a good broker , they have software that will show you what your investment will look like with all of the companies . Please let me know if I can help in any way .
Can insurance companies raise prices ? Yes or no , depending on the product you choose to buy . Whole life policies tend to have a guaranteed premium that the company can not raise the price of . That is a reason whole life tends to be more expensive than other choices , because the insurance company can not at a later time , change the cost . Term policies on the other hand , may offer a period of time where the cost is locked in , but it usually wo n't be for the life of the policy . A person could have a period of time where the cost stays the same for say , ten years . After ten years the price would go up every year the policy remained in force .
Health insurance companies can indeed raise your rates ... but only if they increase rates for everyone else in your group . You can never be singled out for a rate increase due to your claims . When carriers increase rates it is because claims for everyone with the same policy class have risen to the point that premiums no longer support the claim level .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
Here is the list that I keep on file for my clients : >> Fast for a minimum of 8 Hours Prior to Exam unless you are diabetic or have another health condition . If you do have a health condition we will discuss specific instructions for your case . >> Insist on Morning appointments only ! Blood pressure and exam results tend to be better in the morning . Many examiners are available on Saturdays as well . >> If you are sick on the day of your exam , cancel . We can always reschedule the exam when you are better . >> Take your medications as you normally would . >> Avoid alcohol for a minimum of 24 hours prior to your exam . Blood pressure , liver enzymes and more may be elevated otherwise . >> If you smoke , do not smoke prior to your exam . Smoking raises blood pressure . For cigar smokers and other tobacco users Some of the companies will give you a non-smoker rate but your urine sample needs to be negative for nicotine . Please call to discuss your case >> Your weight Check your weight in the days leading up to your exam . On the day of your exam , take your shoes off , dont wear belts , empty your pockets , wear light clothing . IMORTANT Make sure you ask the examiner what your weight is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to weigh you again . >> Your height Stand up straight just like Mom told you to . IMPORTANT Ask the examiner what your height is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to check again . >> Avoid Caffeine on Exam day Caffeine elevates your blood pressure . Avoid it for at least a few hours prior to exam . >> Cholesterol TIP Eat plenty of oatmeal and bananas in the week leading up to your exam and lay off the sweets and other cholesterol elevating foods . >> Exercise TIP If you exercise , do NOT exercise on the morning of your exam . Exercise may artificially raise your blood pressure . >> Water Drink lots of water to flush out your system leading up to the exam .
It is possible , depending on your carrier . However , items like trampolines , swimming pools , swing sets etc , even if they do n't raise your homeowners insurance rate , certainly raise your liability exposure . For that reason , it is important to review the amount of liability protection your policy provides . Do you have enough if someopne got hurt and you were sued ? Be sure to have thecoverage that you need by increasing the liability coverage in your Homeowners policy and look into buying extra coverage in a Personal Umbrella Liability Policy . These begin coverage at $ 1,000,000 and can be increased as needed .
There are many things you can do to lower your insurance rates . Many agents will tell you to raise your deductibles however this is NOT always the best solution . Example would be lets say you had a $ 100 deductible for comprehensive coverage with most carriers raising it to 500 lowers it only about 30.00 a year but you put 400 more out of your pocket before the insurance company pays anything . So Higher deductibles may not be the best option for you . Also yes you can take a safe driver course but this lowers your policy on average on $ 50 a year with many carriers so that is n't much of a savings If you do not have a lot of assets then lowering you liability limits is a options . Some agencies refuse to write you with lower limits . Your best option is to shop with another carrier and talk toa local agent who has many carriers .
The cost of Home Insurance is based on the losses in your area . Extreme weather works in cycles , so a specific area will have several years of very severe storm losses , causing rates to go up . When that cycle ends the losses go down and so do the rates . Of course construction costs tend to trend up , as do the values of everything else , and insurance rates have to adjust to compensate , but without rate increases , insurance companies would not be able to afford to stay in business through the bad years . A great example of this is the state of Florida . After Hurricane Andrew , insurance companies were hit very hard . When they tried to raise rates the state passed legislation limiting rate increases . So , backed into a corner , many insurance companies went broke or pulled out of Florida . Consequently , the largest insurer in Florida is now the state of Florida -LRB- the taxpayers are on the hook for claims if another significant storm hits -RRB- . After several years of no severe storms , that trend is reversing with several insurance companies coming back into the state and the # of policies the state holds is decreasing .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is The Most Affordable Health Insurance In Iowa ?
There are many affordable health insurance plans in Iowa , especially since federal subsidies will become available through the Iowa Health Exchange in 2014 . Open Enrollment begins in October of this year . `` Bronze '' plans will be the cheapest , since they have the highest out of pocket expense . If you qualify for the maximum subsidy , your premium may be much lower than you expected . As experienced brokers , we provide free online information and quotes that allow you to shop for the best health insurance prices in Iowa . Individual , family and business plans are available . Keep in mind that your age and place of residence will impact the price you pay . f you have any pre-existing conditions , the Exchange plans will provide coverage without asking medical-related questions .
There are many affordable health insurance plans in Iowa , especially since federal subsidies will become available through the Iowa Health Exchange in 2014 . Open Enrollment begins in October of this year . `` Bronze '' plans will be the cheapest , since they have the highest out of pocket expense . If you qualify for the maximum subsidy , your premium may be much lower than you expected . As experienced brokers , we provide free online information and quotes that allow you to shop for the best health insurance prices in Iowa . Individual , family and business plans are available . Keep in mind that your age and place of residence will impact the price you pay . f you have any pre-existing conditions , the Exchange plans will provide coverage without asking medical-related questions .
The cheapest health insurance rates in Iowa will be typically offered by one of the approved carriers on the Marketplace , which was created because of recent legislation . Coventry Health Care and CoOportunity Health will feature individual plans to individuals and families through the Exchange -LRB- Marketplace -RRB- and expect statewide coverage . Other participating companies will be Avera , Gunderson , Sanford and Health Alliance Midwest . So how do you apply for a policy or compare prices ? An experienced broker -LRB- along with their website -RRB- can shop for the best rates , show you the best options and discuss your federal subsidy that could potentially reduce your premium quite a bit . As a broker for more than 30 years , our focus is to help consumers navigate the healthcare waters -LRB- in Iowa or other states -RRB- so they can find the cheapest plans , but also understand what they are purchasing .
To get online life insurance in Iowa , start by going to a website that offers it , input your information , and see what premiums run for different face amounts and term lengths . If you are not sure if that website carries coverage for Iowa , you can use an instant quote engine to see if one comes up when you put in your state . Once you have your quotes , you may be called by that agency , or you can go ahead and call them to firm up your quote . Even though you may do the rest of the process digitally , by fax , or email , it is a good idea to visit personally with a knowledgeable agent so that you do not waste time applying for a policy that you are not qualified to get . A good Case Manager will also help a lot by contacting you throughout the underwriting process , to let you know how things are going . In the end , you will wind up with a policy in Iowa without ever having to leave your home .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
If you have been shopping for life insurance in Iowa and found the prices to be steeper than you expected , it may be because of the following : 1 -RRB- you are over age 40 , 2 -RRB- you are looking for permanent or a long term policy , 3 -RRB- you have a health condition , or 4 -RRB- you use tobacco . The rates that people hear advertised are usually for a younger person with excellent health and with the rate locked in for only 10 years . In 10 years , that person may be in the same situation you are . So you might just want to lock your premium in for as long as you can , because it will probably never be lower than it is today . That is true not just in Iowa , but all over the United States . If the need arises , it will have seemed like a bargain .
The price of Long Term Care Insurance in Iowa varies widely depending on the features of the policy , the age and health of the person taking it out , and the amount of coverage based on local costs . Long term care costs in Iowa run approx $ 75,000 per year for nursing home care . The long term care federal tax deduction limits are noted on this page , which tell you the premiums that can be deducted as a medical expense . WEBSITELINK
Aviva Life & Annuity Company has a New York and Iowa Company . The Iowa Company is 1.67 billion in assets with a total surplus & Asset Valuation Reserve of 85.3 million . Aviva Life & Annuity Company is rated by A.M. Best A - -LRB- 4 -RRB- , Standard & Poors A - -LRB- 7 -RRB- and Comdex 62 .
Having disability insurance is a good idea in Iowa or in any other of the 49 states in the United States . Sometimes it will be provided by your employer . If not , then it is up to you to buy a Disability Insurance policy for yourself . If money is tight , getting a Long Term Disability policy is recommended , as it is more unlikely that you can financially survive an extended period without a job , as you would be able to endure a short term disability . If you can afford it , you can purchase both Long and Short Term Disability Insurance .
In Iowa you have two options . You may purchase liability insurance with a state minimum set at 20/40/15 or you may verify your assets and purchase a guarantee bond and register it with the state . Most people see insurance premiums as much cheaper than paying liability out of pocket in an incident . Talk with your local independent agent or send me an email and we can discuss your options further .
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
Yes , the state of Iowa requires that you have auto insurance . The minimum required coverage is liability of $ 20,000 per incident with a $ 40,000 maximum and $ 15,000 in personal property coverage .
That 's a great question ! Peoples Life was purchased by Monumental Insurance Company . They are a subsidiary of Transamerica . The company is located in Cedar Rapids , Iowa and have been in business since 1858 . They are a good company , and one I use frequently . If you would like contact information , or details , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
If you are in need of information on homeowner 's insurance in Iowa , give me a call or send me an email . Many companies offer the similar coverage as many of their contracts are written off the same template . There are some variations in coverage and coverage options which may apply to your personal situation . Trevor Toft State Bank Agency 7122754512 sbagency@schallertel.net
To answer your question , you do not `` need '' to purchase disability insurance in Iowa . However , it may be something you want to purchase . statistics -LRB- we all hate them -RRB- show a person is more likely to have an accident outside of the workplace where work comp does not apply . Many employers have reduced expenses through cutting benefits and no longer offer disability . Check with your employer before looking for you own place if it is something you desire .
Renters insurance in Iowa is a tremendous value for the coverage you get . While policies from different insurance companies vary slightly , the basic coverages are very similar . The primary coverage pays for damage/loss to your personal property and pays for injury or damage you cause to others or their property . To start , you need to add up the cost to replace all of your personal property -LRB- clothes , furniture , wall hangings , books , CDs , personal records , etc. -RRB- and that is the amount of insurance you need to purchase . In most cases , the personal property items are covered while inside your rented unit and while with you away , however there may be some limitations to coverage while away from your unit . You 'll have to look at specific policies to know that . Liability coverage is very important because it pays if you are found to have injured or damaged other people or property , unless that injury or damage was caused by a motor vehicle , in which case your auto policy handles it . Liability coverage under the Renters policy protects you if someone gets hurt in/on your rented property , but also from damage you cause while out and about . A common example is you hit someone with an errant tee shot while playing golf . One thing to remember is that you want to make sure you get your personal property covered for replacement cost . If you do n't you wo n't get much for property that is over a couple years old .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
Looking at car insurance rates by state , the 2014 model shows North Carolina as the 6th most competitively priced state for auto insurance premiums . Put another way , North Carolina was 46th out of 51 for most expensive auto rates . The North Carolina Auto Insurance Premium was $ 1060 which was based off of the average of all 855 vehicles surveyed in the study . The only states cheaper were Iowa , Idaho , New Hampshire , Maine and Ohio .
Life insurance prices are dependent on the type of insurance product , the age , and health of the insured on the contract . Life insurance contracts sold in the state of Iowa are not more expensive than life insurance contracts sold in any state . If you are finding that life insurance premiums seem too high , you may be looking at the wrong thing . You should seek out another source for insurance quotes and compare .
On average the lowest premiums are found in New Hampshire , Ohio , North Carolina , Iowa and Maine . The average annual premium is right around $ 1000 . Of course rates are going to vary depending on the characteristics of the individual driver and the vehicle which is being insured . The most expensive state is Louisiana with average rates around $ 2600 .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Life Insurance Be A Tax Deduction ?
In general terms life insurance can not be deductible personally or business . However , that being said , certain qualified plans allow for funding part of your annual plan contributions with life insurance : participating whole life insurance at 49.5 % and universal life insurance at 25 % of your annual contributions . You 'll have to pay an economic benefit tax , but it may economically viable to consider .
Disclaimer : The following answer is not to be considered tax advice . Contact a qualified tax professional before making any financial decision . Yes , long-term care premium payments may be tax deductible . It depends on the tax status of the individual or business entity filing an IRS tax report . The IRS annually publishes the limits on the amount of premium that can be entered into the tax return and where to enter that amount for consideration of tax deductibility . For non-business consideration , that would currently be `` Medical expenses '' in Schedule A . If by adding the allowable portion of the LTCi premium to Medical expenses causes the total amount of medical expenses to exceed the threshold -LRB- formerly 7.5 % of AGI , going forward 10 % of AGI -RRB- , then the amount beyond that threshold may be deductible . If not , then the allowable portion of the LTCi premium would not qualify for deduction . For business consideration , the portion of the premium allowable for possible tax deductibility is usually reported on Schedule C . At the present time , only a C-corporation may have 100 % of the LTCi premium considered for deductibility . The allowable amounts of LTCi premium for tax deductible consideration are age-based . For insured-ages 40 and under , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 360 . For those ages 71 and over , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 4550 . Between that minimum and maximum are various age brackets with different allowable amounts . Those amounts will be adjusted for income-tax-year 2014 and each year thereafter , under current tax law . Tax preparers , accountants , tax attorneys , and tax-preparation software are informed and are updated for each tax year .
Life insurance in general is not tax deductible . However , in several instances it can be . The two most important taxes to considering a deduction is income tax & estate tax . Under income tax , life insurance is deductible inside a qualified retirement plan , like a pension or profit sharing . There are some other instances that it may be deductible for a company . In regards , to the estate tax , life insurance is not really deductible , but it can be taxed heavily if not set up correctly . The ownership of the life insurance policy determines if it is included in the estate & taxed or excluded from the estate and not taxed ! In all cases , base to seek competent advisors .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
Yes , many long term care insurance premiums can be deducted on income tax as a medical expense . The plans must be qualified LTCI plans . The Long Term Care Federal Tax Deductible Limits for 2013 are itemized on IRS Revenue Procedure : 2012-41 . These limits are age based . Here are how some of the deductions work . 1 -RRB- Working for someone else : Only the portion of total medical expenses that exceeds your adjusted gross income by 7.5 % can be deducted , using Schedule A on your tax return . If your employer pays the full LTCI premium , your employer may deduct the total expense . 2 -RRB- Self employed : The entire premium of you , spouse and dependents -LRB- up to federal age based limits -RRB- can be deducted on line 29 of tax form 1040 . 3 -RRB- C Corporation : 100 % of premium is deductible for employee , spouse and dependents with no age based limits on premium . 4 -RRB- State income tax deductions and/or credits 5 -RRB- Paying premium with HSA .
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
Typically , you can not claim your home owner 's insurance on your primary residence as a deduction on your taxes . If you own , rental homes , then you could deduct the premiums as a tax deduction . A good rule of thumb for insurance used for personal benefit -LRB- not a business use -RRB- ... if you can deduct the premiums on your taxes , the benefits are likely to be taxed . Disability is probably the best illustration ... if the premiums are taken out pre-tax , then the benefit is taxed . Life insurance inside a pension plan is another example ... the death benefit is taxed as income !
Could be . Since I am not a certified accountant , I can not give tax advice but here are the parameters for possible tax-advantaged treatment to discuss with a tax professional : 1 . Every year the IRS publishes the formula of percentage of premium by age that can be used for favorable tax treatment on the 1040 tax return . This formula is updated on various tax preparation software programs every year and certainly qualified tax advisors know what it is . It is also public information that can be obtained at various websites .2 . If the premium causes one to exceed the minimum percentage of health care costs on Schedule A , that amount above the minimum percentage could be deductible .3 . If one is a business owner , the above mention formula may be used on Schedule C to determine the deduction allowable as an amount paid for health insurance premiums .4 . C-corps may be able to ignore the IRS formula and deduct 100 % of the long-term care insurance premium on Schedule C.There may be other situations in which the payment of LTCi premium is treated in a tax-favorable manner . This is a topic for discussion with a qualified tax advisor before a consumer should make any assumptions about the tax treatment of the payment of long-term care insurance premiums .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
Deducting your healthcare premiums is not only possible , but makes financial sense . I 'll use myself as an example . I have been an insurance broker for 33 years so there may not be a better resource . I own an HSA -LRB- along with the High-Deductible-Health-Plan -RRB- and have been a supporter of this type of policy for many years . Although I may file my taxes differently than yourself , I am able to deduct a portion of the premiums along with the proceeds that are deposited into the HSA . A self-employed person can deduct health insurance on their taxes in a number of ways . However , whether you use Turbo-Tax or simply complete your own tax return without help , it s always wise to consult a tax expert or the IRS website regarding deductibility of health insurance . And remember that premiums and actual expenses may be treated differently as well persons that itemize vs. not itemizing .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
In Canada , in most cases , life insurance premiums are not deductible . There are a couple of exceptions : 1 . If the insured is applying for a loan and the institution lending the funds requests that he or she buy life insurance as collateral , a portion of the premiums on that policy qualify as a deductible expense -LRB- the Net Cost of Pure Insurance -RRB- 2 . Where a donor donates a life insurance policy to a charity or a charity takes out a policy on the donors life , the premiums paid by the donor will be considered a charitable donation eligible for a charitable tax credit -LRB- for individuals -RRB- or deduction -LRB- for corporations -RRB- . Even though it is not deductible there are several situations where corporate owned life insurance should be considered . For example : The insurance is required to fund a buy-sell agreement , there will be more than one insured shareholder . There will probably be different ages and unequal premium rates . There may also be cost differences among shareholders due to underwriting premium ratings . Corporate-owned policies help to equalize the resulting premium differences . The taxpayer with the lowest tax rate requires less pre-tax income to pay the premiums ; their dollars are cheaper . In many cases that could be the corporation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . -LRB- Since tax laws vary by jurisdiction and do change , check with your local tax and professional advisors . -RRB- Note : The information contained in this article is intended to provide general guidelines only . The application and impact of the law can vary widely from case to case based on the specific or unique facts involved . Accordingly , the information in this article is not intended to serve as legal , accounting or tax advice . Users are encouraged to consult with their professional advisers for advice concerning specific matters before making a decision .
Is disability insurance deductible for taxes ? Depends on your situation . If you are an employee who has their disability coverage through a payroll deduction program , it can be deducted for taxes through their payroll plan . Self employed individuals can also deduct disability insurance from their taxes . Please note , in either case when you deduct premium , the benefit becomes taxable income .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
If you are self employed , you can deduct 100 % of your tax qualified long term care insurance premiums as a medical expense . There are federal tax deductible limits on how much premium can be deducted at each age , ranging from $ 360/year at under age 40 to $ 4,55 / year at over age 70 . An individual can add LTC premiums with medical expenses , and the amount of that total that exceeds 10 % over adjusted gross income is tax deductible . After age 65 , the amount that exceeds 7.5 % over AGI is deductible .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Forest Fires ?
If you mean your renting a property and a forest fire comes and burns down your residence thereby destroying your property then yes , you are covered . Of course this is providing you purchased personal property coverage on your renters policy . Also note there may be limitations on certain items so you want to talk to your agent and review your coverage needs . Keep in mind , the landlord is responsible for their own property and should have coverage for the dwelling of their own .
A renters policy will cover the loss of personal property which results from a named peril . Fire is a peril covered by almost every renters policy . When applying for coverage it is smart to take pictures of all your property and then determine how much it would cost to replace it . After the policy is issued store the pictures somewhere they can be retrieved in case you experience a loss .
Home insurance covers fires with most carriers and the type of policy you have . Also it matters on how the fire was started lightning that started the forest on fire by your home or if the neighbor child lit fireworks and it caught the field on fire and your hope . Two different examples of fires one the home should be covered by your insurance the other could be paid by the person that started the other fire . I highly recommend you contact your agent and make sure you are properly covered and also make sure you home is clear of debris and brush to make sure that if a fire is heading your direction that you have a clean perimeter around the home . There are things that you can spray on your home that will prevent it from burning if you know a forest fire is on it 's wayAlso
Yes , your Homeowners Insurance does cover damages resulted from forest fires , except when : a -RRB- you got a brand new policy -LRB- not renewal -RRB- during the forest fire in progress . Usually insurance carrier forbids binding new coverage in restricted/catastrophic areas . To check if your area is currently restricted visit WEBSITELINK b -RRB- due to prior losses your policy limits coverage and excludes fire . Check your existing policy documents . Most of insurance carriers provide policy forms in electronic format . Open your policy in any browser and search from the word `` fire '' . Then read related page and you will get the answer to your questions .
Renters insurance will not cover earthquake or flood . A separate policy will be required if you are looking to insure those risks . Renters insurance depending on where you live may exclude or carry a different deductible for wind . Wind would include a hurricane . Lava flow would be excluded as well . A big Forest fire would be covered if you wish to consider this a natural disaster .
Damage from fire is a very common covered peril in a Homeowners ' policy . Whether this fire is localized to your home or if your home is damaged as a result of being in the path of a forest or wild fire , there would be no difference in the coverage provided .
If you mean your renting a property and a forest fire comes and burns down your residence thereby destroying your property then yes , you are covered . Of course this is providing you purchased personal property coverage on your renters policy . Also note there may be limitations on certain items so you want to talk to your agent and review your coverage needs . Keep in mind , the landlord is responsible for their own property and should have coverage for the dwelling of their own .
Depending on your State laws , you may have the option to obtain coverage through a State Fund or similar product . I would reach out to the Department of Insurance where you live and inquire about options . Typically insurance carriers will deny coverage for a property based on the risk involved in insuring the location . For example , a home in a heavily wooded area , in an area where forest fires are of concern , would carry a much higher risk than a property in a downtown neighborhood might . In these cases , the State Insurance Fund normally covers the property . However , depending on your state , this insurance is not very cost effective , and can be very limited in coverage . In some cases , once you have the State Fund policy in place , you can find an insurance company who can provide a rider policy to cover items the State Fund does not cover .
Forester 's Life Insurance is offered through the Foresters fraternal benefits society . They sell insurance in the United States , Canada and the United Kingdom . Policyholders become members in their organization and become eligible for member benefits . To compare Foresters Life Insurance quotes , company information and policy features with other companies , contact a website that offers free quotes or consult your local agent .
Most insurance companies will not insure a home if it is located near brush or is in a wildfire area . Tahoe is in a National Forest so it will be very difficult to get a home insurance policy . You will likely need to use the California FAIR Plan . They will insure your home as long as it 's not in need of repairs . Take a look at this site on Brush Fire Insurance for more information . WEBSITELINK
Property insurance is based upon the concept of shared risk . That means that the chances of experiencing a fire that would destroy your home are really low , however , if that were to occur the loss would be quite high . Others property owners face a similar dilemma . If you could share your risk with others you would pay a small amount to avoid losing a large amount . When risk is shared it is considered a pool . Insurance companies form pools and allow people to share the risk of a large loss in exchange for a small loss , the property insurance premium . The amount of this insurance premium is determined by professionals known as actuaries who compare the loss history of millions of pieces of property to develop statistical probabilities of loss for a certain defined piece of property . Additionally they compute the probabilities of different pieces of property and calculate a premium for those losses as well . If you have a home in the forest and I have exactly the same home but live in a suburb the chances are greater that you would experience a catastrophic loss than that I would . This difference is developed mathematically by reviewing millions of losses over a long period of time . As a result we can both be in the same pool but you would pay more than me because you represent a greater risk to the pool . In order to be permitted to do business in your state the insurance commissioner of your state must approve the premiums charged by your insurance company . The commissioners chief concern is that the insurance company is able to meet the promises that it makes . Comparing the losses sustained over time with the premium income of the company helps the commissioner determine the ability of the company to keep its promises -LRB- even in very trying times . -RRB- This then develops into the premium that the company charges you for coverage . It is based on statistics and the companys experience and represents your share of the cost of insuring a pool of risks so that there is sufficient money to take care of a catastrophic loss or anything in between .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
That is a great question ! Your question is a really good one , as it really speaks to the balance of affordability and adequately covered . Your insurer will have a program that estimates the value of your belongings . If you own an expensive collection , or have high end electronics or jewelry , that value may not be covered . Take some time and research what the value of those items are , if that is the case for you . Find out what it would cost to replace it , or if you have the receipts , what you paid . Contact some local builders , and find out what it would cost to build a home like yours Do not include the cost of the land , unless it 's landscaped , or forested -RRB- . Compare those amounts with what you have for your coverage . If the opposite is true , and you have n't got a lot of stuff , go low , and increase your coverage as you add to your belongings . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
One reason that life insurance can be a good investment is because it is safe . Life insurance that has been tucked away can be a source of great comfort and surprise to survivors . Unlike other investments that have strict tax guidelines to follow , a forest of paperwork arriving in the mail , and the constant need of evaluation , most life insurance policies are pretty steady and low maintenance . And sometimes slow but sure is a good type of investment to have .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Renter 's Insurance does n't just insure your personal property . It comes with Liability Insurance as well . This is what the landlord is interested in . I will give you an example . Let 's say you had a candle burning and it caught the building on fire . If the building burns down , the landlord will collect from his insurance company . That insurance company then has a right to come after you since you caused the fire . Knowing that most people who live in apartments do n't have sizable net worth 's they assume they wo n't be able to get you to pay them for the damage to the building and for loss to other tenants in the building . So , the landlord 's insurance company probably gives him a discount for requiring tenants to have Renter 's Insurance . Your Renter 's Insurance will pay for certain types of damage that are caused accidentally by you , such as fire and explosion under your liability coverage . This is a great way to protect your assets and Renter 's Insurance is very Inexpensive . If I can help shoot me an email at dbeukel1@amfam.com .
I previously posted this piece in response to a renter insurance question . I am sharing it here , hoping that it might be of value in answer to this inquiry . Mr. Pipes provides a good summary before me and concludes with an important question . I am adding this message with a personal example of the value of this coverage . Renters insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and several other common loss circumstances . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
Although I have answered similar questions of this nature previously , it is such an important coverage that I will repeat it . While I obviously do not know your particular situation and whether or not your landlord requires you to maintain renters insurance , I can tell you the following that might help you see the value of some of the coverages provided . Renters ' insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and others . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . No one was hurt but the apartment became uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy , they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions and they received reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . Additionally , the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... but the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation . That alone would have cost them heavy legal fees . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Happens If I Cancel My Universal Life Insurance Policy ?
Universal life policies are somewhat tricky . What happens when you cancel a universal life policy depends on when you cancel the policy . In the beginning years of a UL it has no cash value accumulated , so if you cancel during that stage nothing happens other than the policy terminates . You get no money back . In the mid range years of the policy it will likely have some cash value , so if you cancel it during that period you may receive the cash value . In the later years of a UL , unless you have kept pace with the increasing `` cost of insurance '' , -LRB- in other words paid increasingly higher premiums -RRB- , the cash value that has accumulated may be reduced by they increasing cost of insurance until there is no more cash value remaining . At that point the policy may terminate . So if you cancel the policy while it has cash value you will receive the cash value . If there is no cash value when you cancel the policy it will simply terminate .
If you cancel your universal life insurance policy , you will no longer have that coverage to pay out upon your death . Likewise , you will no longer owe any premiums . If your policy has cash value at the time that you cancel it , you can collect that , minus any fees and/or surrender charges . If there is not enough cash value in the policy to collect anything , the policy simply ends .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Universal life policies are somewhat tricky . What happens when you cancel a universal life policy depends on when you cancel the policy . In the beginning years of a UL it has no cash value accumulated , so if you cancel during that stage nothing happens other than the policy terminates . You get no money back . In the mid range years of the policy it will likely have some cash value , so if you cancel it during that period you may receive the cash value . In the later years of a UL , unless you have kept pace with the increasing `` cost of insurance '' , -LRB- in other words paid increasingly higher premiums -RRB- , the cash value that has accumulated may be reduced by they increasing cost of insurance until there is no more cash value remaining . At that point the policy may terminate . So if you cancel the policy while it has cash value you will receive the cash value . If there is no cash value when you cancel the policy it will simply terminate .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
I ca n't imagine why you would want to just cancel your Whole Life insurance policy ! You know that you have the option of replacing your current policy with another policy and have all the value of the current policy transferred to the new policy ? However as you asked what happens when you cancel a whole life policy - what happens is you no longer have the insurance . If the policy has grown sufficient cash value to cover the surrender fees and have an excess , you should be able to receive the remaining cash value at the time of cancellation . You really should talk with a qualified Insurance Adviser and find out what your options are and then decide how to proceed .
Some questions you might ask when considering life insurance are : 1 -RRB- What is the rating of this company ? 2 -RRB- Are the rates guaranteed not to go up ? 3 -RRB- Does this policy have cash value ? If so , please show me an illustration . 4 -RRB- Will you be working with me if I need any assistance with my policy in the future ? 5 -RRB- What happens when the terms ends ? -LRB- if buying Term insurance -RRB- 6 -RRB- What riders are available for this policy ? 7 -RRB- How do I borrow from this policy ? -LRB- if buying Whole or Universal Life -RRB- 8 -RRB- What policy has the best rates for my health ? 9 -RRB- May I also get coverage for my spouse ? 10 -RRB- What if I want to drop this policy in the future ? There are many other questions you could ask , but these are some common ones that people ask me . This assumes you know how much coverage you need , and what type . Otherwise , those are also questions you will want to discuss with your agent .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
That is an excellent question ! One of two things will happen . If the policy was paid up long ago , and has remained in effect , then it acts like any other policy , and when the insured passes , it pays out . Unfortunately , what happens most often is that Parents had a policy on the child , the parent that paid the bills passes , the policy does n't get paid , goes into grace period , and then lapses , and cancels . All those years of payments go up in smoke . Please ensure that your loved ones have a copy , or access to , your finances , sand their payment schedules , so that this does n't happen to you . I have had to have the conversation about unpaid policies far too often , and each time it breaks my heart to see the child realize there is no insurance . Thanks for asking !
You bet . Home insurance is n't a two-way street . There are certain things an insurance company is unable to do , such as cancel your policy if you are paying your premiums . On the other hand , as the policy holder , you have the right to cancel your policy at any time . Their are a couple key items to consider before making a change . 1 . What coverage changes exist from my current company to the new company ? Is my coverage improving ? 2 . What discounts will fall off by making this change ? 3 . How is the billing handled ? There are a couple more steps to take if your insurance if paid by your mortgage company . The bottom-line answer is yes . Work with an experience professional to help get the change done properly . It happens every day !
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
what happens to my life insurance when I retire ? If the life insurance is provided by your employer it will depend on what they offer . It might end immediately , it might carry on into retirement or you might be offered to carve out an individual policy from the group plan . There is n't a single answer as plans are different . If you `` own '' the policy what happens to your life insurance is what ever you want to have happen to it .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Another way to think about this question is , `` How much woulda disabling event cost you without coverage ? '' Considering Brandon 's well-thought out response to you , also thinking about the question from the darker side makes many of us uneasy inside though . -LSB- I do n't like to think something like that can happen , but it does . -RSB- From personal experience , I can tell you that disability insurance and critical illness insurance has a very real place in anyone 's planning who has a paycheck and depends on that paycheck for their living . Period . I am now 42 years old and at the age of 27 I delivered a very healthy baby girl - went home from the hospital after 4 days like normaland on the 5th day had a pulmonary embolism that locked up both of my lungs almost to the point of death . So instead of being gone from my job for 8 weeks on maternity leave , I was gone for almost 5 months . Without my DI and CI policies , it would have been a financially crippling event for my family . It was not expected - but it unfortunately happened . Brandon shared some very realistic numbers here for consideration . I applaud anyone looking into these ancillary policies to protect their planning . Sheryl Brown / @AshBrokerage
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Do Life Insurance Companies Test For Drugs ?
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Insurance companies typically test for drugs with bodily fluids such as blood and urine . In some cases they test hair , but that is rare . The length of time a drug stays in your body and can be detected by routine testing varies . Regardless , it is important that you are truthful when you complete your life insurance application . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Most life insurance companies use companies called parameds , which dispatch nurses to collect medical history and health data . Besides registering height , weight , blood pressure , they collect blood and urine samples . These samples are tested for common diseases and drugs including nicotine , prescription and illegal drugs . Even on smaller cases where blood and urine samples are not warranted they will sometimes use a mouth swab or hair sample especially if there is any type of suspicion of drug use .
That is a great question ! Typically when the company tests , they send a para-med who will collect one or more of these things , depending upon the company , and their impression during their visit : a blood sample , urine sample , hair sample , and / or mouth swab . The hair samples are very accurate , and are very difficult to fake , and are becoming more common , as testing them becomes cheaper . Thanks for asking !
Insurance companies must weigh the cost against the benefit of extensive testing of applicants . Urinalysis was the major tool used for many years . In the case of high amounts of coverage blood testing was and is still used . This was largely replaced for many applicants with a mouth swab . Today many companies rely upon self-declared listing of prescription drugs . They can develop a pretty accurate profile of an applicant this way at very little cost .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
Only policies that use medical underwriting will test you for drug use through a blood and/or urine test . Simplified issue policies do not order blood tests , but they usually do ask about drug use on your life insurance application . Guaranteed issue life insurance does not ask about drug use on your application , nor does it test for it . However , the minimum age for guaranteed issue life insurance is usually at least 40 years old . If the drug use that you are referring to is marijuana , that generally is not a problem , if you apply with the right companies . Using marijuana after a recent DUI or after treatment for addiction is problematic . And of course , using cocaine , meth or heroin makes it difficult to get all but the most lenient -LRB- and therefore , most expensive -RRB- of life insurance policies . Talk to a life insurance agency that you can trust to find out what type of policy is workable for you , at the lowest possible price . They are bound to privacy and no insurance company will see your name unless you actually apply for the policy .
Marijuana use is and has been prevalent in the United States for a very long time . It is the most widely used of all recreational drugs today , and is used by people of all walks of life . Its active chemical , commonly known as THC has been proven to help those with rheumatic diseases , ocular conditions or certain mental illnesses and is a known relaxant . Whatever your stance is on the use of illegal drugs , it is likely that at some time in your life you have encountered marijuana , and for many it remains a concern when applying for insurance . Does the use of Marijuana make me ineligible for life insurance ? If you use marijuana , you may be a little concerned about taking the required exam to get term life insurance fearing that if marijuana use is detected , you may be ineligible for coverage . Fear not . Marijuana use , by itself is not something that will make you ineligible , but it is something that is tested for . Of course , the results of the test may come back negative , but the questionnaire will probably also ask whether you have used any illegal drugs in the past five years . If the answer is yes , again , you should be able to qualify for life insurance . If marijuana shows up in your blood test , the chances that you will be able to qualify for the most desirable rating class are somewhat diminished , and if they show up not all at -LRB- but you answer yes to the question about marijuana use -RRB- your chances are diminished somewhat . Will I get a smokers rate if I use or have used marijuana ? Each life insurance company follows different guidelines , but generally , you will not be charged smokers rates for life insurance if you have used or are currently using marijuana . If my life insurance blood tests positive for marijuana use , will this information be reported to law enforcement or the government in any way ? No . By law , your medical records are protected . The report will go to the MIB , but you give your consent to this when you fill out the life insurance application . The MIB stands for Medical Information Bureau , and it is a non-governmental agency which provides services to health and life insurance companies across the U.S. . The information submitted to the MIB is not accessible to the government . Is there any way to get life insurance without taking a blood test ? Yes ! There is something called No-Exam life insurance which does not require an exam of any kind . Depending on the amount applied for and whether they require a blood test for that amount they will . The question about drugs is always on the application regardless of amount so if you were to answer honestly -LRB- suggested -RRB- they would know . In some cases you are simply rated as a smoker . Other companies may decline you . I suggest you work with a broker who knows what to look for in a company .
Yes , any life insurance company that requires a blood test , urine test , or oral swab in order to get a life insurance policy will test for the presence of illegal drugs and cotinine -LRB- an indicator of cigarette use -RRB- . This is called a medically underwritten policy . If using a No Exam policy , they do not require an exam and do not test for drugs , although they will usually ask about drug use on the application .
Some life insurance companies have been increasing their drug screening to the Drug 5 Panel/Drug 8 Panel in response to the increasing use of illegal drugs . The 5 panel drug test detects cocaine , PCP , marijuana , opiates , and meth/amphetamines . They also test for nicotine/cotinine and alcohol . No Exam policies do not conduct blood or urine tests .
Guardian life will test for Nicotine and Cocaine . These are the two most common substance tests that almost all insurers test for when they perform medical underwriting . Besides these two substances , most carriers -LRB- Guardian included -RRB- , do not test for other substances , i.e. drugs . If there are other drugs that you currently use and you do not disclose , you do run the risk of creating a contested life insurance policy if you should die within the contestability period .
MetLife offers life insurance that does drug test , and it also offers nonmed life insurance that does not drug test . The applications for both types of policies will ask if there has been illegal drug use in the past . One policy does a blood test and urine test , while the other just goes by what is on the application , which must be filled out honestly to prevent insurance fraud .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , all companies when using paramedical exams do some drug testing as part of the chemical analysis in the underwriting process . Some drugs will effect certain levels of function within say kidney function that will show up by pushing the level higher . Alcohol for example , a legal form of a `` drug '' if consumed too close to an exam will raise blood sugars , alter the kidney function numbers and a few other numbers like those involving the liver . That is why it is never a good idea to consume significant amounts of alcohol the night before a blood/urine test . It will skew the results . Then it is up to the individual to get a second test , at their expense to show the first test was off .
Life Insurance companies must do a blood test for any amount over around $ 25,000 , although some groups allow up to $ 150,000 . The tests are to detect both legal and illegal drugs . If you are taking medications and do not disclose that , they will be found . This helps the carrier determine what your general state of health is . So assume that whatever the drug is you may be taking , it will be detected by the test . Even a week after you have taken that drug . Thank you . GARY LANE .
A drug test can be your best friend when you apply for life insurance . If you smoke pot on a casual basis , and have been prequalified for non-smoker rates , then a clean drug test on your insurance exam will prove you are true to your word . Let 's suppose you used cocaine in the last year under highly exceptional circumstances , and your broker was able to get you underwriting leniency from a carrier . Their offer would be contingent upon a clean drug test now . If you you still use drugs , then you should consider one of the simplified issue policies referenced above . The only problem is that the total amount of coverage for which you will qualify will be comparatively small . If you need more substantial coverage , then there is a small possibility an excess-market carrier will take you . These underwriting syndicates specialize in extreme risks .
What tests are run for life insurance depends on the coverage applied for and vary somewhat by company . For smaller amounts there may just be a non-medical declaration and depending on whether or not anything is declared there may be no testing . If urine , and/or blood , is required , testing could include testing for bodily functions . The presence of raised levels of certain substances , such as sugar in urine , would trigger more tests . In addition , testing is done for nicotine and for traces of illegal drugs . X-rays , electrocardiograms or other tests could also be required . It is very important to be truthful when completing an application for insurance . If you have a medical condition you are concerned about , then experience and independence are important . I suggest working with a local agent/broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Yes , life insurance companies that require a paramed exam will drug test . If you purchase a nonmed policy that does not require an exam , no drug testing will be done . However , they usually ask about drug use on the application . The exception is fully guaranteed issue life insurance ; they do not ask any health or risk questions .
Life insurance companies do test for THC , the chemical in the blood that is deposited after smoking or ingesting pot . If they find THC in the blood , they will ask you to fill out a drug questionnaire , and from there decide how to rate you . With some companies , infrequent marijuana use does not affect your rates much at all . If you are taking a policy that does not require an exam -LRB- called nonmed or no exam policies -RRB- they will not test for pot . They do usually ask about drug use on the application .
Life insurance companies use a urine test , blood test , physical measurements and possibly a resting EKG to evaluate your overall health and your risk of death . A urine test is most commonly used to test for drugs or alcohol , but may also be used to test for certain medical conditions . A larger death benefit may require additional testing .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Can I Have Two Renters Insurance Policies ?
While I can not imagine why you would want two policies covering the same property you need to know that you will not be able to recover damages from both companies for the same loss . In other words you can not double your money . I would suggest that you meet with a trusted insurance agent and secure one policy that provides adequate coverage to meet your needs .
You can have a renters policy for each rental unit you have . You could have a unit in the city where you work . You could have another in the country where you spend your weekend . You could have another in the mountains where you ski , hike and take vacations . If you want to take out two policies covering exactly the same thing expecting to get a double payment in the event of a claim , you might be subject to an investigation for fraud .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
The entity that is renting the property to the ` renter or renters ' is typically the homeowner policyholder . It could be an organization , corporation or individual who holds the homeowner policy . The owner of the residence pays for their own policy . They are the ` landlord ' in common terms . The renter may be required by the owner , to carry a renter 's insurance policy but the two policies are different . Even if the renter is not required to have a renter 's policy , it is a wise move to purchase one , as the premiums are usually relatively low and the coverages are fairly extensive , primarily for losses and damages to personal property and also for liability coverage for accidental injury to others .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Eyeglasses are personal property and the Renters Policy pays for personal property damaged by covered perils so in that sense , yes , eyeglasses are covered by the Renters Policy . They would also be covered by a Homeowner Policy and a Condo Policy . However , all those policies come with a deductible . A deductible is money you pay toward a claim . The insurance company pays the excess . Say , for example , it costs $ 300 to replace glasses that were damaged by a covered peril , like a fire . If you had a $ 250 deductible , you would only recover $ 50 . I would suggest , you not submit the claim . Most insurance companies have a threshold of two claims in three years . After two claims in three years , your policy will not be renewed and because insurance companies share claim information , you will not get a competitive offer from any standard insurance company . You will end up paying much , much more money for the same coverage . My advice is to raise your deductible as high as you can tolerate and save your insurance for real disasters . Your question is important and I hope I 've answered it to your satisfaction . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Its no problem . I answer questions like this all the time . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
A renter should have renters insurance to protect your assets , personal property and loss of use . However unless required by a landlord to carry renters insurancethen renters insurance is an option . I recommend you check with your auto insurance provider about obtaining renters insurance policy since in many cases the multi policy discount will off-set the cost of renters insurance .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is The Average Monthly Cost Of Health Insurance ?
It will vary greatly due to a number of factors including ; -LRB- 1 -RRB- current health status . How healthy are you when you apply ? -LRB- 2 -RRB- age - younger ages tend to be less expensive -LRB- 3 -RRB- tobacco use - smokers pay a higher premium -LRB- 4 -RRB- past health history -LRB- 5 -RRB- location - certain areas are more expensive to have insurance than others . I would suggest you visit a brokers website and do a quote online . You will also find carriers offer various prices due to your deductible choice , coinsurance , etc. .
The average monthly cost of health insurance depends on many variables . Among the biggest factors influencing your rate are your age , where you reside -LRB- state and zip code -RRB- , your smoking status , what health conditions you have , and the type of benefits your policy will offer . For example , a single healthy young person in Ohio could pay as little as $ 25 per month for a short-term plan , since prices for health insurance in Ohio are very affordable . Conversely , New Jersey medical coverage prices will be substantially higher , as will most other states . Allow an experienced broker help you shop and compare . Our websites also are typically very helpful to consumers shopping for healthcare coverage .
In 2014 the national average cost of a Silver level plan -LRB- approximately 70 % coverage level and the most common plan design purchased -RRB- was $ 328 per month . This cost , in the overwhelming number of cases , will increase for 2015 plan year rates . As this is a national average figure and health insurance costs vary significantly from state to state , between regions within a state , and between different insurance carriers , it is only the roughest approximation of what health insurance might cost you . Your age and tobacco use status , plus the health insurance plan and insurance carrier you select are the primary factors in determining what your specific individual health insurance rates will be . Finally , whether or not you fall within the income ranges where you would qualify for some degree of an advanced premium tax subsidy will also factor into what your final monthly cost for individual health insurance would be .
Health insurance is vital for everyone . Even a person that is young and healthy can be involved in an accident . The average ER visit is around $ 1,300 while the average cost per hospital stay is over $ 10,000 . While health insurance can be very expensive , the new tax credits can reduce the cost significantly . Additionally , those under 30 can qualify for catastrophic coverage . These policies have lower monthly premiums and cover only preventive care and any costs over $ 6,350 per individual . This provides the lowest monthly premium while limiting out-of-pocket costs .
Dollar cost averaging into an annuity is the generally associated with monthly the purchasing of equities and bond investments inside separate sub accounts in variable annuities . Dollar cost averaging can level the net asset value purchase price by the monthly frequency of buying low and/or high through the year . It is a great beginners strategy for those who have monthly cash flow and little lump sum deposit ability to invest with .
A health insurance rate is the total amount in dollars that an insurance company would charge you on a monthly basis for a particular set of health benefits . For example , it could be $ 175 or $ 400 per month , the number is a function of several factors but it simply translates the annual estimated cost & risk for providing health services and taking on the risk of future health problems or accidents you might have and gives you that figure on a monthly basis . In the era of government health insurance marketplaces and the role of advanced premium tax subsidies in helping persons purchase individual health insurance , be advised that depending upon you and your family 's income level you could qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium costs and in some cases also qualify for reduced deductible and out-of-pocket expense exposure . If you are in this income range -LRB- and no small number of Americans fall somewhere within the subsidy income ranges -RRB- then the monthly premium most prominently displayed is the reduced premium you pay each month after your subsidy payment had been applied . In this context you are not paying the full premium for your health insurance and are being subsidized for some , in some cases all , amount of the true total premium cost of your health insurance plan . You will also want to look at your cost of insurance before any subsidy was applied so that this consumer understands the true total cost of the plan they selected .
When youre asking what insurance do you need when you retire , we need to know if youre asking about Health Insurance or are you talking about protecting your family from loss . If your question pertains to your health insurance because most of us loose that when we retire then you have two options . You can look at either a Medicare Supplement , which works similar to car insurance and what I mean by that is you can buy a plan with no deductible and pay a higher premium , that will cover all of your doctor and hospital expenses or you can assume part of the risk and pay a lower monthly premium with a deductible or co-pay and it will still cover your doctor and hospital expenses . Medicare Supplement will run you anywhere from $ 155 to $ 200 per month so around 2-3 thousand dollar per year to see your doctor 4 to 5 times a year . Some people like this option because their monthly cost is set even when they have a bad health year . The other option you have is to look at a Medicare Advantage plan if its available in your area . Most plans have either low or no monthly premium and small co-pays when you see your doctor or are hospitalized . All plans have a maximum out of pocket to protect you for bad health years so if youre like the average senior and you see your doctor the 4-5 times a year , your health insurance cost will run you under $ 100 . If you were asking about insurance to protect your family from loss then the answer get more complicated because we have to look at what insurance you already have in place , if you have a pension are you looking at taking a full or partial , do you have a 401K , if married when is your spouse going to retire and if it would be better to take their social security now or wait . With out knowing the answers to some of those questions answering that question would just be a blind shot in the dark .
An Average person driving an average car living in an average neighborhood with an average driving record who wants average coverage 's and drives an average amount of miles and holds an average job with an average wife and average kids and an average income would surely pay an average price . However as an agent to be a little more specific I would need the answers to what is average .
The only way to receive accurate estimates for yourself is to contact a few insurance agents in the area you 're considering purchasing a home . An insurance agent can provide a quote for a property you 're considering purchasing . Home insurance rates can vary greatly based on geographic location , the individual home and the individual homeowner . The average monthly cost of 20 homeowners in Austin TX might be $ 100/month , but the average monthly cost of 20 homeowners in Houston TX might be $ 200/month because of the greater risk of hurricanes .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
The average cost of life insurance varies so much that it is impossible to state a meaningful figure . What is average for a 20 year old male is a far cry of what is average for an 80 year old male . Those two persons generally do n't even need the same face amounts or purchase the same type of policies . To find the average cost of Term Life Insurance for a relatively healthy person , you can use quote engines on websites that will show that . Better yet is to call the website or a local agency , and discuss your health and the type of policy you want . If they have several companies that will cover you with the same type of policy , that is a good way to see an average price of what life insurance would cost for you .
There are many factors that can contribute to the cost of your insurance . First , there is the type of plan that you choose . A more basic plan that covers only emergency or sickness will cost less on your monthly premiums , but will most likely not cover wellness visits . A more comprehensive plan that covers various wellness visits and tests will be more expensive on your monthly premium , but may save you money in the long run due finding health problems before a catastrophic illness . Other contributing factors are age , lifestyle and previous medical conditions . A person who is in decent health at average height and weight will pay less than someone who is overweight , uses tobacco and has a preexisting medical condition . Options that you choose for your medical plan can also raise or lower your premium . Going with a low annual deductible will cause your monthly premium be higher versus going with a higher deductible . If you are relatively healthy and are comfortable with having a higher out-of-pocket cost will save on the premium . Of course , if you do end up needing to go to the doctor or having a test done , you may end up paying more due to the deductible . Also , having a doctor visit copay option on your plan may make going to the doctor easier to pay , but that option will add to your premium . Health insurance can be a confusing thing to purchase . By doing your research and contacting an agent , it can be a little less confusing and help save you and your family from a financial crisis .
The most recent figures for late March , 2014 indicate that the average cost of an individual major medical health insurance policy in the United States is $ 328 per month . That said , your results can and almost certainly will vary . A national average figure is not likely to be reflective of what the cost would be for you in the specific area of the state that you are a resident in . Also , this average figure does not take into account any possible advanced premium tax subsidy a person might qualify for , which would reduce that person 's net cost of insurance . Individual health insurance rates can vary wildly from one state to another and can vary significantly within the various regions that each state is subdivided into under the structure imposed by the Affordable Care Act . And the reported national average price becomes an even more unreliable yardstick because it also averages in a wide range of levels of insurance coverage . As an analogy , you can get an average cost for a new car purchase in the U.S. but that may bear little resemblance to the price of the specific car you want to buy .
That is an excellent question ! One of the biggest fears of retirement is running out of money . What happens if I live longer than my retirement fund will last ? This is a very real problem , as Americans are living longer , -LRB- On average , 15 years after retiring -RRB- on small retirement funds -LRB- average 3 years worth -RRB- . Social Security benefits are not enough , and long term health care costs evaporate what little funds there were very quickly . Annuities are a great way to provide a steady monthly income , or to help with long term care costs . Your annuity will pay out a steady payment to you , and many now have provisions for doubling or even tripling that payment for a period of time to help pay for those LTC costs . Annuities are not the best investment for everyone because of the way they are structured , so it is important that you discuss this with an advisor that you trust , okay ? Thanks for asking !
When looking at the average cost of Medicare Part C a person should consider the monthly premium as well as the out of pocket costs throughout the year . In many states the premium for a Medicare Part C -LRB- or Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- can be $ 0 per month to $ 50 per month . However , the max out of pocket costs can be as much as $ 6,700 per year . You will also want to make sure you are happy with the network of doctors and hospitals that are available to you . Going to a provider outside of the network can cost you a lot more . You may also need to get a referral before seeing a specialist . In contrast , those that have a Medicare Supplement Plan have a monthly premium but have far less out of pocket costs throughout the year . There is also no network which means you can see any doctor or hospital you like . You also do not need to worry about getting a referral for a specialist . The benefits of a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- can not change from year to year . An independent agent will be able to help get you all the information so that you can decide which is better for your specific situation . For more information about Medicare visit our website .
That is a great question ! Thanks to the Affordable care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , there are now exchanges where you can look at several policies to compare them . Even so , they can still be confusing . How do you know what to look for ? I 'd ask you to contact one of the advisers available on the site , or a qualified agent to help find the right policy for you , but here are some simple things that you can look at to get an idea . -LRB- I have simplified this greatly -RRB- The OUT OF POCKET COST - this is what it will cost you to get your service , Doctor visit , or service . The out of pocket is determined by your DEDUCTIBLE -LRB- the amount that you pay before the insurance company pays - a high deductible plan will cost less in monthly premiums , but more when you need medical help -RRB- , your CO-PAY , -LRB- the amount that is charged to you for the service rendered . Typically , the lower your out of pocket , the higher your monthly premium will be . If you/your family are healthy people with few prescriptions or medical needs , a high deductible plan with a low monthly cost might make sense . The PREMIUM - this is the monthly cost of the policy that you will pay to the insurance company for the coverage the policy will provide . The COVERAGE - what the policy will allow for services , Doctors , and prescriptions . Here 's where an adviser can be really helpful . You want the policy that covers the most things for the least cost , while allowing you the most freedom over who to use as the provider of the services . If you have a medical need that requires frequent services , and you 've had the same Doctors for awhile , you 'd want to be sure that the policy allows that doctor to continue being your Doctor -LRB- They call this in-network , or out-of-network and charge accordingly -RRB- , and that his/her office accepts that insurance . This is a greatly simplified overview , and I would still advise that you have someone help you when you are choosing , but this hopefully gives you a better idea of how to get started . Thanks for asking !
Getting married may or may not have an effect on your insurance policy depending upon what actions you take . Technically adding your new spouse to your policy will not change your benefits but it may have an impact on your monthly costs . If you are covered under an individual major medical policy then you would see your monthly premium increased by the amount associated with your spouse 's age for the policy you have in force -LRB- this assumes you are covered under an Affordable Care Act compliant policy taken out on or after January 1 , 2014 when community rating went into effect -RRB- . If you are adding a spouse to an employer based policy then the financial impact will depend upon what your employer 's contribution is towards employees with dependents . Some employers contribute towards the health insurance premium costs of their employees and their covered dependents . Increasingly though , employers are contributing only towards the cost of the employee 's coverage and the employee is totally financially responsible for the difference in cost for adding a dependent to their coverage . To make things even more interesting , the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- does not define spouses as dependents ! So , while the practice has not become wide spread yet , some employers are not allowing spousal coverage under their group plans -LRB- dependent children must be covered according to the ACA -RRB- . What is more common is that if your spouse is employed and their employer offers health insurance and yet you still wanted to add your spouse to your coverage , the employer could assess a penalty charge above and beyond the additional premium cost for adding a spouse in this situation . Obviously the objective here is to discourage the addition of spouses whose cost and risk could be borne by another employer . So , adding a new spouse to your health insurance coverage may not be the simple transaction that it may have been in the past . You need to explore your options and determine what the financial implications are for adding a spouse to your coverage . In some situations you may find that it makes more sense financially to purchase individual health insurance coverage for your spouse than to add them onto your group 's health insurance plan . I would recommend you find a health insurance broker to assist you with this decision making process .
The average rating people get for life insurance is Standard . From that , you can determine the average cost for persons of different ages . Keep in mind that the average cost for an 80 year old is going to be much different than the average cost for a 20 year old . As will the average cost for someone with diabetes as compared with someone with perfect health . The length of the term , or whether the policy is a permanent policy , have a great effect on the premium , as well . It is a good idea to go into a life insurance sale with your top dollar that you can spend , in mind . Then see if you can get a policy that suits your needs for a premium a little lower than that . Something is better than nothing , and by consulting with an honest and knowledgeable agent , most people can find coverage at a price they can afford .
The cost of life insurance increases with age . Obviously , the older we get the more likely we are to die , resulting in the life insurance company paying out a claim . In the words of George Lopez , `` Each Birthday is just another year closer to death '' or `` Studies have shown that the more birthdays you have the longer you live '' . The life insurance industry has amassed a large amount of data at what age people die and the cause of death . With a large enough population , they can predict accurately the average age of a man & woman at death , which helps them derive the cost of insurance based on the age of the insured . For example , in a 20-yr level term , they simply average out the cost of insurance for that 20 year span . For a permanent policy , they simply average the cost until the average age of death . So , all life insurance costs increase as we grow older . That is the reason why the premiums for insurance are much cheaper when we are younger . One last consideration ... because the cost of insurance increases , if you purchased a permanent -LRB- eg universal life , variable universal , etc -RRB- and paid only minimum premiums to keep the policy going , you may receive notification that you need to pay a large sum in premium to keep the insurance in force . This occurs when a policy is underfunded or in other words , the policy owner did not pay enough premiums in to the policy over time and it can not sustain the cost to pay out the death benefit .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is PPI Auto Insurance ?
PPI is ` Payment Protection Insurance ' . In addition to vehicle purchases , PPI is also purchased in mortgage and some credit situations . It ensures repayment of loans for the policyholder , in the event of illness , death , disability and unemployment . Generally , when the policyholder is unable to earn , for documented reasons like those stated above , the insuring company chosen makes payments to the lender , usually for a specific period of time . Additionally , there is usually a waiting period associated with the coverage , before payments will begin . PPI is often referred to as ` credit insurance ' .
Critical Illness Insurance in the United States is not classed as PPI because the United States does not have PPI -LRB- Payment Protection Insurance -RRB- , as such . While PPI is tied to a loan or mortgage , critical illness insurance is a stand alone policy that usually pays a lump sum to the insured person when diagnosed with certain serious illnesses .
No , Critical Illness Insurance is not classed as PPI -LRB- Payment Protection Insurance -RRB- . With PPI , the person who got the loan may pay extra for protection in case he/she loses his/her job . The PPI policy will make the loan repayments , or possibly even pay off the entire loan or mortgage if the Insured passes away . Critical Illness Insurance will pay the Insured if he/she is diagnosed with a qualifying illness listed on the policy . This payment can be used to pay off loans or used for other expensees .
PPI is ` Payment Protection Insurance ' . In addition to vehicle purchases , PPI is also purchased in mortgage and some credit situations . It ensures repayment of loans for the policyholder , in the event of illness , death , disability and unemployment . Generally , when the policyholder is unable to earn , for documented reasons like those stated above , the insuring company chosen makes payments to the lender , usually for a specific period of time . Additionally , there is usually a waiting period associated with the coverage , before payments will begin . PPI is often referred to as ` credit insurance ' .
Critical Illness Insurance is not the same type of policy as PPI -LRB- Payment Protection Insurance -RRB- . Critical Illness Insurance pays a lump sump to the insured person if the Insured suffers a qualifying illness or health condition . PPI makes payments for a mortgage or large loan if the insured person is unable to work due to an accident , illness , or losing their job . It might also pay off the loan if the insured person dies due to that condition .
PPI is not the same as Critical Illness Insurance . PPI -LRB- Payment Protection Insurance -RRB- is taken out when obtaining a large loan or mortgage , and payments may be included with the loan . It is to make payments -LRB- or pay off -RRB- the loan if the insured is unable to work -LRB- or passes away -RRB- . Critical Illness Insurance pays the insured a lump sump if the insured is diagnosed with a qualifying serious illness or health condition . Even if the insured works through treatments , the benefit will be paid to the insured person .
Critical Illness Insurance is not the same as PPI , or Payment Protection Insurance . Critical Illness Insurance pays a cash benefit to the person insured by the policy , when the insured person is diagnosed with a serious disease listed in the policy . The cash benefit can be used as the insured person wishes . PPI payments are triggered when the insured person is unable to work due to job loss . The inability to work may be due to illness or other reasons . The payments go to repay a lender who is carrying a mortgage or large loan for the insured person .
Payment Protection Insurance , or PPI , is insurance offered in some European countries and Australia . It is tied with a mortgage or loan . If the insured person is disabled due to injury , illness , or being laid off , PPI will make the mortgage or loan payments . Critical Illness Insurance in the United States will pay the insured a lump sum upon being diagnosed with some serious illnesses or health conditions . They can pay off their own bills with that money .
A Critical Illness Insurance policy is not the same as a PPI -LRB- Payment Protection Insurance -RRB- policy . With Critical Illness coverage , the person who has the policy will collect a cash benefit if he/she suffers one of the serious illnesses listed on the policy . With PPI , loan payments will be made to a lender if the person on the policy is unable to work due to illness , injury , or job loss .
If PPI means personal property insurance then no it is not mortgage life insurance . Life Insurance for mortgages is simply a life policy which the death benefit is equal to your mortgage amount . In the past , this life insurance which was a term product also decreased the benefit which would be close to what your balance is as you pay off the mortgage . Today , you can get a level benefit for the same cost . If you were to die before the mortgage was paid off the benefit goes to pay the remaining balance . On a decreasing term , that did not leave much left for your spouse unless you had another policy . With the level benefit , whatever is left after the balance is paid off would go to your heirs .
PPI stands for Payment Protection Insurance . If the insured person is unable to work due to disability or losing a job for any reason , the policy will pay the benefit directly to a lender to pay off the money owed to them by the insured person . Critical Illness Insurance pays the benefit to the insured person if they are diagnosed with a particular disease as outlined in the policy .
Critical Insurance in the United States is not PPI . The United States does not have Payment Protection Insurance , per se . There are life insurance policies sold with some mortgages and loans that would pay off the loan in case of death , in the US . Critical Illness insurance pays the insured person a lump sum so that they can pay their debts as they see fit .
PPI is Payment Protection Insurance that pays off a loan in case of disability , death , or being laid off a job . The payment goes directly to the lending institution . Life Insurance is different , in that it pays a beneficiary chosen by the policy holder and that beneficiary can use the money as they see fit . Also , Life Insurance is only paid to the beneficiary upon death of the insured person .
PPI , or payment protection insurance , pays a lender if the borrower is disabled , laid off or fired , or deceased . Critical illness insurance usually pays the insured person if they become seriously ill with a life threatening health condition . Sometimes the critical illness policy will go directly to medical bills .
PPI covers repayment of loans such as car loans , mortgages , credit and store cards , and personal loans in the event that the borrower becomes unemployed or disabled . It does not pay life insurance premiums if unemployed or disabled . There is a disability rider that can be added onto a life insurance policy to pay the premium in the event of disability .
PPI -LRB- Payment Protection Insurance -RRB- is an insurance policy offered in England , Wales , Scotland and Northern Ireland that will make your payments for your large loan or mortgage if you became unable to work due to illness , accident , disability or job loss . It may have a death benefit that will pay off your large loan or mortgage if you die . Critical Illness Insurance will pay you a lump sum upon being diagnosed with some serious illnesses or health conditions . You are then able to use that money to pay for bills , health care , or however you wish .
No , life insurance does not have PPI added into the premium . Payment Protection Insurance is popular in Europe -LRB- especially in the United Kingdom -RRB- and Australia , but has been the source of some scrutiny when added to loan repayments without the borrower knowing it , or when consumers have been coerced into purchasing it .
Yes and no . PPI or payment protection insurance is an add on to some loans that provide insurance like coverage to make the payments that come due when some event occurs that would typically prevent the borrower from paying the payment when due . In the traditional sense of mortgage protection insurance , the insurance pays the remaining payoff balance on the mortgage in full rather than simply paying the payments due . Full payment of the mortgage balance ensures that the surviving spouse or family has full ownership control over the real estate .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover A Nose Job ?
Only in the event of it being medically necessary which is no small challenge to establish . You would have to have a severely deviated septum or similar condition that was seriously affecting the ability to breathe and probably to sleep . All other less invasive courses of action would almost certainly have to be exhausted first before such surgery would be approved . A nose job for cosmetic purposes would not be covered by health insurance .
Medicare will cover a nose job when it is considered medically necessary - this is generally seen with things like corrective surgery due to a broken nose . If the nose job is only warranted for cosmetic purposes , you would be paying for the procedure out of pocket .
Rhinoplasty , or a `` nose job '' as most people know it , is standardly classified as a cosmetic procedure . Just because you want to look more like Paris Hilton or Brad Pitt is not a medical problem -LRB- it may be a sign you have some other problem but not a medical one -RRB- . Cosmetic surgical procedures are rarely covered by health insurance plans and whenthey areit is generally for a reconstructive purpose after a illness or injury . Patients who go to their doctor and present themselves with a serious breathing problem associated with their nasal cavities and who get a determination of medical necessity may get approval from their health insurance carrier for surgery to correct the breathing problem . And , as a side effect of this surgical procedure they may get what amounts to a nose job . People and some physicians do game the system with this approach and you should anticipate having to clear a pretty high bar for your health insurance carrier to approve this procedure .
Only if it is deemed a medical necessity , and even then the insurer may require a second opinion . Health insurance will not cover a noise job that is being preformed for cosmetic reasons alone . If the noise job were to correct a breathing problem such as a severely deviated septum that resulted in potentially serious complications such as sleep apnea then it would be a qualified medical expense . Also if the nose job was a reconstructive procedure following a serious accident that seriously damaged a individuals face then again yes .
Only if deemed medically necessary . If you had an illness or were in an accident and had to have any kind of reconstruction , then it would be covered . If you just want a nose job because you think your nose is to big then no , it 's not covered . Your best bet is to read the exclusions and limitations section on your policy .
Only in the event of it being medically necessary which is no small challenge to establish . You would have to have a severely deviated septum or similar condition that was seriously affecting the ability to breathe and probably to sleep . All other less invasive courses of action would almost certainly have to be exhausted first before such surgery would be approved . A nose job for cosmetic purposes would not be covered by health insurance .
If the purpose of the rhinoplasty is cosmetic , Medicare will not pay for this surgery . Medicare may pay for rhinoplasty for one or more of the following conditions : to improve breathing , to repair defects in the nose caused by trauma , to treat congenital anatomical abnormalities when function of the nose is affected , to repair nasal tissue after removal of a tumor when function is affected , to treat sleep apnea or other conditions that interfere with breathing when other treatments do not work , or to reconstruct the nose in case of severe deformity .
It depends upon the circumstances of your departure . In the extreme case where a person is `` terminated for cause '' , punching the boss in the nose for example , then your coverage may be terminated as you are heading out the door . While each employer has their own internal personnel policies regarding employees leaving the job , generally you will be covered until the end of your last month of employment because you have probably had money withheld from your paycheck to pay for that month 's premium . When an employee resigns from a company or is terminated/laid off under normal circumstances then the ex-employee has the legal right to continue their coverage under their former employer 's health plan for some period of time . If the employer has less than 20 employees then state continuation provisions -LRB- which vary from state to state -RRB- will apply . If the employee has 20 or more employees then the Federal COBRA provisions apply where most people can continue their coverage for up to 18-months and even longer in some situations such as divorce . It is the ex-employee 's responsibility to inform their former employer that they will be continuing their coverage and it is the ex-employee 's responsibility to pay the full premium on time each month .
It would only be covered under your health insurance plan if it were deemed medically neccessary . Given the elective nature of the procedure I would say that 99 % of the time it would n't be covered . However , make sure to check your benefits and contact your carrier prior to the procedure to see if it will be covered . Although , not covered ... you 'll hopefully have a smaller , straighter nose :-RRB-
Essentially all health insurance plans will cover some forms of plastic surgery . The crucial distinction that the consumer must understand is the difference between reconstructive plastic surgery and cosmetic plastic surgery . For example , accidents , burns from fires or chemicals , and some cancer treatments trigger the medical necessity criteria necessary for restoring or at least improving the normal functions of an individual . This is totally different than you deciding you would feel better about yourself if you had your favorite movie star 's nose or breasts . That would be a purely cosmetic procedure with no bearing on your physical health -LRB- if fact , you are actually putting your physical health at risk -RRB- . If you want to pay to look like a real life Barbie Doll then go for it but your health insurance company loves you just the way you are .
Medicare will cover corrective surgery that is considered medically necessary . If you have an injury to your nose , Medicare may cover surgery required to return you nose to the `` original '' condition . In other words , surgery to repair the FUNCTION of the nose , not the appearance . Similarly , if you have an illness such as deviated septum or skin cancer that requires surgery -LRB- including reconstructive -RRB- , Medicare will most likely cover the cost of surgery . But surgery strictly for cosmetic reasons is not an allowable claim .
Most cosmetic surgery is not covered under Medicare . Exceptions are made when the surgery is considered medically necessary to repair an injury or in the case of a radical mastectomy , to reconstruct the breast . If treatment for skin cancer of the nose caused disfigurement , Medicare may pay for restoration of your facial features .
Suze has a nice piece online entitled Truth About Annuities . She devotes a lengthy paragraph to variable annuities . She lays out the basics of variable annuities with a slight negative undertone , a disparaging down her nose expose . There are some contentions in her paragraph worth a rousing conversation .
Well , if an agent 's nose starts to grow you can probably guess they are lying . Most adults and filter out when they are being lied to . The axiom , `` If it sounds to good to be true it probably is '' pretty much applies across the board . If someone makes an outrageous claim , encourages you to lie on the application , or promises their plan will do something no other plan will , they are probably lying .
The answer to this depends very much on when you asked her the question ! When she was a producer in the financial services industry , Suze was a big proponent of variable annuities . Now that she is a talk show `` money guru '' , she thumbs her nose at them . The truth is , annuities are n't `` good '' or `` bad '' -LRB- just like any other financial product -RRB- . There are good ones and not-so-good ones , but the product itself is n't `` evil '' . The key is to make sure that they are being bought/sold for the right purpose .
Why buy Cash Value Life ? Why not ? Cash value life insurance provides a tax favored pot of money that the insured can use at their choice . This pot of money inside your policy can be called upon in times of need to provide funds for emergencies , education expenses and really , anything you want . The best part of that is you do n't have to ask permission , you do n't have to explain your need to that guy in the cubicle that looks down his nose at you to decide if you 're worthy . You just call and it 's wired to your account , no questions asked and you use it for what you want . For some people who understand , that aspect alone is very liberating . And it 's been that way a long while . JC Penny , the actual JC Penny , used the cash values in his life insurance to help pay his payroll and keep his stores open during the great depression . There are other valuable aspects about cash value life I could detail but I 'll stick to this one for now . I 'll bring up another positive on another post .
Rhinoplasty is generally nose surgery performed for cosmetic purposes and health insurance does not cover cosmetic surgery -LRB- unless it is for restorative purposes such as after an accident or cancer -RRB- . That is not to say that rhinoplasty would never be covered but it would have to be for medically necessary purposes . If you have had chronic health problems caused by your nasal passages it is possible that your insurance carrier will cover this procedure if it is determined to meet the criteria of medical necessity to solve the problem . Sometimes this can result in some real hair splitting with part of the procedure being deemed medically necessary and part of it cosmetic , resulting in only partial coverage for the procedure by the insurance carrier . How the doctor codes the procedure can be an important aspect ofwhether the procedure is approved and how the claim is eventually paid . Just remember , your insurance company thinks you are beautiful just the way you are .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
That is a great question ! If what you are asking is something along the lines of `` I had this job once , with a 401k , and I left the job , does the 401k still exist ? '' , the answer is yes , it does ! It may be hard to find if the company is n't around anymore , but it does still exist in some financial institution that is overseeing it . Start with the company HR department if they still exist , or hunt up the bank that used to do your paychecks , you might get lucky . If that does n't work , try your Secretary of state , it should be on file who they used . Thanks for asking , and happy hunting !
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is A Normal Deductible For Renters Insurance ?
There are several deductibles available for damage to personal property . In a renters policy companies will often offer deductibles as low as $ 100 . The decision to select a low deductible should be based on your ability to sustain a small loss yourself . The larger the loss you can sustain yourself , the higher the deductible you should select . The higher the deductible you select the lower the cost of the renters policy .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
It depends on the carrier . Some carriers do not treat normal pregnancy as a sickness that keeps a woman from working and do not replace income during a normal pregnancy . However , to fully answer the question , request a `` specimen policy '' from the carrier you may beconsidering to find out the exact contract language aboutthe replacement of incomeduring pregnancy . Here is a typical treatment of normal pregnancy from a highly-reputable carrier for DI : `` If the Elimination Period for Your Disability Benefit is less than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are not covered Sicknesses . However , if the Elimination Period is equal to or greater than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are covered Sicknesses subject to the definition of Disability . '' Now , one has to refer to this carrier 's specific definition of disability in the specimen policy : `` During the Your Occupation Period * you are not able to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material acts necessary to perform your occupation in the usual and customary way and you choose not to work at any occupation . After the Your Occupation Period You are not able to engage with reasonable continuity in any occupation in which you could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of your age , education , training , experience , station in life , and physical and mental capacity . '' * Insurance-speak for the occupation you are in when you become disabled ; you pick the period of this part of the definition of disability when you apply , typically 2 years up to age-67 . The longer the your occupation period , the higher the premium . Thats because the risk to the company is higher to replace income for a longer period of time due to the fact that the choice to work in another position or not during this period is yours . The key to the question is : does your condition of pregnancy restrict you from working ? The insurance carrier will want to know that from your doctor before they will start the clock on the elimination period -LRB- 90 days -RRB- , after the fulfillment of which you will start to get income replacement checks . If you add a `` partial disability rider ' , usually at extra cost , you might not have to be `` totally '' unable to work in your occupation to get a pro-rated replacement of income as you work part-time . Again , refer to the specimen policy .
Renters insurance cost can vari greatly . I would say that on the low end it would cost about $ 100/yr . If you have your renters policy and auto policy with the same carrier you will normally receive a discount . In some cases the discount for having renters insurance and auto insurance with the same carrier will almost cover the amount for the renters insurance .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
The IRS does not look favorably on any personal insurance deductions such as car , home , boat , jewlery or fine art insurance or rental insurance . However , Renter 's Insurance Can be tax deductible if you operate a business out of your home . In order to claim the renters insurance as a valid deduction you must allocate a certain percentage of your home as your office space and that portion theirof is tax deductible as part of eligible expenses . If you do not own a business , you can not deduct your renter 's insurance
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance will pay for a hotel stay on a short term basis following a covered loss , the deductible will apply and the charge must be deemed normal and customaryand must not exceed the policy limit for Loss of Use . In order for insurance to pay for the hotel , the unit must not be in livable condition as a direct cause of the covered loss by the same policy contract . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive and important form of protection for one 's personal contents , loss of use and personal liability . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . The company will look at your personal medical history , smoker status , height/weight profile , results of the medical exam -LRB- if applying for a policy requiring it - no exam policies typically cost more -RRB- , your family medical history -LRB- e.g. cancer or heart disease before age 60 in the immediate family -RRB- , motor vehicle record , and any hazardous activities you may participate in -LRB- such as aviation , scuba diving , drag racing , etc -RRB- . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In most cases it would not . A lost item is not normally covered by renters or homeonwers insurance . If the item was stolen then you may be covered less your deductible up to the limits provided by the policy . In either case most people would not want to turn in a claim for a cell phone as this is normally a low value item and would put a claim against your coverage .
Normally , you can not deduct auto insurance from your taxes . If you are self-employed or own a business , a car used for that business can have expenses deducted with certain limitations . To fully deduct insurance and other expenses on a vehicle , it must be used 100 % for business purposes . If it is used for both personal and business , it becomes more complicated . With the simplest way , a flat amount per mile can be deducted for all business usage . The second way is to keep track of ALL expenses associated with the vehicle including gas , repairs , and insurance , as well as exact records about miles for business and personal use . The percentage of total miles used for business is the percentage of total expenses that can be deducted . Caution should always be used taking business deductions such as vehicle expenses and home office expenses as the rules are very strict and those types of deductions can increase the likelihood of an audit .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Does VA Health Insurance Cost ?
You asked a very detailed and complicated question . Your first cost is , if you are a service connected veteran , was the days and months you spent in that `` foxhole '' or some distant country that separated you from your family and friends . However , you do not have to be `` service connected '' in order to obtain treatment by the VA. . You can go through a `` annual means '' testing at VA where you are required to provide `` financial details '' including if you do have health insurance . Then you can also be classified as a `` hardship case '' by disclosing financial information and the type of treatment you need . Generally your copays are $ 8 for medication ; outpatient copays are $ 15 for non = specialist and $ 50 for specialist . If you have to be admitted , your copay is the current year Medicare deductible which was $ 840 in 2003 and has been indexing each year and will be $ 2016 in 2014
Yes , you can have VA and Medicare . However , in order to use health care benefits provided by the VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- , you must receive your health care at a VA facility . Medicare does not cover services provided by a VA facility . Medicare benefits can be a good supplement to VA benefits though , covering what the VA does not cover .
Yes , Medicare can be secondary to VA. . The two do not work together ; the VA only covers services provided at VA facilities and Medicare does not cover care provided at VA facilities . But if the VA approves care outside their providers , Medicare might cover it . As far as drug coverage goes , VA drug coverage does not have a premium and covers most or more than the drugs covered for Medicare Part D so there may not be a need for both plans if the VA is your primary provider .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- benefits . But in order to use VA benefits , you must get care at a VA facility . And Medicare does not cover services provided by a VA facility . So they are not altogether compatible . But VA benefits can be a good supplement for what Medicare does not cover , such as prescription drugs .
The VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- requires that you receive care at their facilities and with their providers in order to receive VA benefits . Thus , the VA does not accept Medicare , as Medicare only works with Medicare approved facilities and providers . Many veterans use Medicare for their major medical expenses but use VA benefits to fill in the gaps . However , the VA drug plan covers more than Medicare Part D covers .
I would advise enrolling in both Medicare Part A and B even though you get your medical care through the VA. . If you want to get care outside of the VA you will need to have Medicare A & B. Depending on what is going on with your health it may be important to get medical care from a doctor or hospital that is not part of the VA system . I have clients that have a Medicare Supplement with me so they can utilize doctors and hospitals outside of the VA but they still use VA doctors for some of their health care needs .
The VA offers life insurance for Veterans under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- Those separating from the service may convert their Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- to Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- for 120 days after release from active duty . With a statement of good health this can be extended one year . 2 -RRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -LRB- S-DVI -RRB- provides life insurance to Veterans who have been given a VA rating for a new service-connected disability in the last two years . Totally disabled veterans can get free coverage . 3 -RRB- Disabled Veterans who have qualified for a VA Specially Adapted Housing -LRB- SAH -RRB- grant may obtain Veterans ' Mortgage Life Insurance -LRB- VMLI -RRB- . Unfortunately , the VA does not offer coverage to Veterans who do not meet these parameters .
Treatment at VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- facilities can be a crapshoot . I hear good stories and bad so the answer is , it depends . If the VA facilities near you are well staffed and not overcrowded , you might `` get by '' with VA alone . Medicare Part A and B give you more options besides just VA facilities . Some VA pharmacies may not have the medications you need in stock and it may take weeks to receive your meds . Having Medicare Part D -LRB- drug plan -RRB- allows you to purchase your Rx via mail order or at a local pharmacy . Medicare Part A and B , along with a good Medicare supplement plan expands your options and may provide shorter wait times for care .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA Benefits . One plan will be a secondary payer . Since the Veterans Administration benefits must be used at VA facilities , usually Medicare is secondary to the VA insurance . However , sometimes VA drug benefits are a good supplemental plan to Medicare , and thus becomes the secondary payer .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Variable annuities -LRB- VA -RRB- s are a security under FINRA and an insurance product under the department of insurance . VAs have two account types : the general interest rate account and the separate sub account that uses equity and bond investments . VAs have internal charges that are paid from the contributions of the policy owner and any crediting or debiting of the accounts are applied , i.e. you can lose make or lose money .
A veteran needs Long Term Care Insurance if he/she does not want to utilize long term health care provided by the Veterans Administration . This may be due to location or some other bias the veteran has about receiving VA medical care . Or a veteran might want Long Term Care Insurance in case he/she can not qualify for full benefits or full compensation for care offered by the VA. .
Why would you want to `` pitch '' a Variable Annuity ? A VA is a useful product for those individuals who want to have upside performance , a basic death benefit , and other living benefits such as Guaranteed Minimum Income Benefits . But PRODUCT , and that includes any of the insurance based products , should be part of an overall consulting relationship where the client understand the risks and rewards of that product . The job of the financial advisor when selling a client a VA is to fact find , determine a client 's risk tolerance , and then provide choices commensurate with a client 's goals . If you do that , a Variable Annuity does n't get pitched , it becomes the product of choice by the client because of the features that it offers .
You asked a very detailed and complicated question . Your first cost is , if you are a service connected veteran , was the days and months you spent in that `` foxhole '' or some distant country that separated you from your family and friends . However , you do not have to be `` service connected '' in order to obtain treatment by the VA. . You can go through a `` annual means '' testing at VA where you are required to provide `` financial details '' including if you do have health insurance . Then you can also be classified as a `` hardship case '' by disclosing financial information and the type of treatment you need . Generally your copays are $ 8 for medication ; outpatient copays are $ 15 for non = specialist and $ 50 for specialist . If you have to be admitted , your copay is the current year Medicare deductible which was $ 840 in 2003 and has been indexing each year and will be $ 2016 in 2014
In order to get VA Life insurance , someone must meet one these conditions : 1 -RRB- Have converted their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days after separating from the Service . This can be extended one year with a statement of good health . 2 -RRB- Have been given a VA rating for a new service related disability incurred in the past two years . This qualifies them for S-DVI -LRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Qualified for VMLI -LRB- Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance -RRB- by virtue of being a disabled veteran who was able to get an SAH grant .
Soldiers are automatically enrolled in the VA 's group life insurance plan -LRB- SGLI -RRB- at a face amount of $ 400,000 . There is a low cost charge to the individual being insured . If the soldier does not want that much , he/she can choose to reduce the face amount . There are also some options to insure his/her family .
To be fair to Suze , she has online piece called The Truth About Annuities , that outlines her position on annuities and which also addresses variable annuities -LRB- VA -RRB- . While she appears to question the VA expense loads a legitimate gripe as in all investment , she seems to down play the tax deferral feature . Read her piece online to determine her position .
You can opt out of Part B by sending a letter to Social security asking that your Part B coverage be cancelled . I hope you have carefully weighed that decision because in order for you to have DRUG coverage yuo have to have Part A AND Part B . If you do not have Part B you can not have any coverage for Outpatient Services - doctors , lab , xrays , etc - unless you have VA coverage and then what happens if you need treatment at a non-VA facility . You need to weigh this question very thoroughly because yuou could be cutting your own throat
VA Life Insurance is not taxable , as long as the beneficiary of the policy is not the `` estate '' . When life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , they are taxable , whether issued by the Veterans Administration or from a private source . But life insurance proceeds left to a person or group do not generally incur income tax . VA Life Insurance is also subject to estate tax if the amount of the death benefit , added to the value of the estate , exceeds the exempted amount . Only the excess is taxed with estate taxes , and the federal exemption is 5.25 million this year . Some states have state estate -LRB- inheritance -RRB- taxes and some do n't .
No , while USAA does offer many different types of insurance products , USAA does not offer Disability Insurance . If associated with the military and having a disability incurred to military service , the VA will pay disability benefits . If you are looking to purchase Disability Insurance while working in the private sector , there are many other Life Insurance companies through which you can purchase it .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Does Variable Universal Life Insurance Cost ?
How much Variable Universal Life costs you depends on a number of factors , some are flexible , some are not . Universal life is a complex product that unbundles the components of a whole life policy to provide you with more control and flexibility . The basic building blocks are cost of insurance , expense charges and investment earnings . There are a number of death benefit options available which affect the cost of insurance . For example you can have a level death benefit or level insurance plus cash value . The cost of insurance can be annually increasing for life , annual increasing then paid up at 85 , level and a number of other options that vary by company . The expense portion of the premium is stated in the policy . Some expenses are fixed and guaranteed others are variable so you would need to refer to the policy for details . In Canada , the earnings inside a universal life policy are always expressed as interest . Some policies have 400 + investment options that , in addition to Guaranteed Interest , can mirror the performance -LRB- positive or negative -RRB- of a variety of mutual funds in a tax preferred environment . I say mirror , because you do not actually own units in the particular mutual fund , just the performance . In Canada , the total maximum premium to keep the policy exempt for accrual taxation is set by the government . This provides you with flexibility , it is important that you understand that if the the policy is underfunded it could go out of force . The policy needs to be managed . So how much does Variable Universal Life Cost ? It depends . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further question , or feel tat I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
How much Variable Universal Life costs you depends on a number of factors , some are flexible , some are not . Universal life is a complex product that unbundles the components of a whole life policy to provide you with more control and flexibility . The basic building blocks are cost of insurance , expense charges and investment earnings . There are a number of death benefit options available which affect the cost of insurance . For example you can have a level death benefit or level insurance plus cash value . The cost of insurance can be annually increasing for life , annual increasing then paid up at 85 , level and a number of other options that vary by company . The expense portion of the premium is stated in the policy . Some expenses are fixed and guaranteed others are variable so you would need to refer to the policy for details . In Canada , the earnings inside a universal life policy are always expressed as interest . Some policies have 400 + investment options that , in addition to Guaranteed Interest , can mirror the performance -LRB- positive or negative -RRB- of a variety of mutual funds in a tax preferred environment . I say mirror , because you do not actually own units in the particular mutual fund , just the performance . In Canada , the total maximum premium to keep the policy exempt for accrual taxation is set by the government . This provides you with flexibility , it is important that you understand that if the the policy is underfunded it could go out of force . The policy needs to be managed . So how much does Variable Universal Life Cost ? It depends . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further question , or feel tat I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The same companies that carry Term Life Insurance often carry Universal Life Insurance , and most agencies that sell Term also sell UL . When purchasing online , you will want to work with a licensed agent who has some experience , so they will understand the in 's and out 's of Universal Life . There are several types of Universal Life Insurance . Guaranteed UL allows you to lock in a level premium that will guarantee the policy to pay the death benefit to a certain age . This guarantee might be 20 years from now ; it might be to age 121 , or something different . It is important to select a guarantee to avoid the problems Universal Life presented in the past , when people bought while interest rates were high , and their policies started lapsing much earlier than anticipated when interest rates dropped . There are also many Universal Life policies that do not have `` no lapse '' guarantees . How long your coverage last relies on what the interest rate and cost of insurance are at any given time . Variable Universal Life allows you to invest in the stock market , with the potential for more growth -LRB- and more loss -RRB- than other UL policies . Indexed Universal Life allows you to take advantage of some modest gains by allocating premium to equity index accounts . While it does not have as much cash growth potential as VUL , it has much more protection from losses . Added to these are Survivor Universal Life policies off all types . These cover two people , and pay when the second person dies . Again , you 'll want to use an experienced agent when you buy UL . There are many knowledgeable agents on this website who can help you .
There are five types of permanent life insurance policies : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Participating whole life and guaranteed universal life are used for indemnification planning . Participating whole life , with a max term rider and paid up additions rider can be used for income as can current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . The income design must conform to TAMRA and minimize the death benefit amount to optimize the crediting methodology .
Universal life insurance can be variable or fixed . They are simply two different types of Universal Life . Here are the basic definitions : Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- is a form of life insurance that can build cash value . The cash value can be invested in separate accounts -LRB- similar to mutual funds -RRB- and the owner of the policy gets to choose which separate accounts are chosen , within the scope of what that particular product offerings are . The word `` variable '' refers to the fact the owner can invest in accounts that vary in value such as stocks and bonds . This variable component results in the cash value in your VUL increasing above or decreasing below what you put in . Universal Life -LRB- UL -RRB- is a form of permanent life insurance where the excess in premium payments are credited to the cash value of the policy . If the cash value is referenced against a stock index such as the S&P 500 , it is called an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . An IUL does not put your money in the market but rather references the performance of that market over a measured period of time -LRB- such as a year -RRB- and credits you with interest if the referenced index has increased . Typically , the cash value of an IUL will not decrease as the result of that market declining - they would simply not credit your cash value account with interest for that particular year .
Universal Variable Life Insurance -LRB- or VUL - Variable Universal Life insurance -RRB- is a form of life insurance that has a death benefit and investment component . Agents who sell Variable Universal Life must have a securities license in addition to a life insurance license . The variable part of the title refers to the investment aspect ; the universal part of the title refers to the insurance aspect of this product .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
Universal Life insurance is a combination of term life insurance and a tax-deferred savings plan paying a variable return . There is a guaranteed interest rate and cost of insurance set which stipulates how long the policy is guaranteed to last . This can be as long as age 121 with some UL products , so that the policy is then considered permanent insurance . Some Universal Life products , especially Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life , are designed to generate cash value . They may or may not have a guaranteed lifetime no lapse feature . Universal Life is an adjustable and flexible policy that can often be tweaked to meet the needs of the insured over a lifetime .
There are many choices of life insurance available to you . The main stream life insurance products are term life , universal life , variable life and whole life . Each one has a specific purpose . Term life insurance is meant to coverage a specific period of time . The common terms are 1-5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . This means the rate or premium you purchase is guaranteed level for that period of time regardless of change in health , life style or occupation . Term life is commonly used for younger people starting out in life , covering a large debt , life a mortgage on a home or business debt , or covering for a young child 's education . term life insurance allows for the largest face amount for the smallest premium payments . Universal life and variable life are permanent life insurance solutions that build cash value . Typically the premiums are more expensive and the face amounts are less because part of the premium is going into a cash value fund that can be invested with numerous options . The cash value can later be used for retirement , college funds , critical or chronic illness or even to purchase a large asset like a home . The universal and variable options are typically more aggressive with the cash value funds . The last option , whole life insurance , is very similar to the previous universal life insurance options . However , the cash value funds are typically a fixed percentage of growth . Whole life as it 's name suggests is primarily meant to cover you for your entire life . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker with numerous carriers to shop the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Term insurance does not accrue interest and whole life policies accrue dividends . Universal life insurance does accrue interest . There are 3 different types of universal life insurance that will accrue interest : Fixed Universal Life - accrues interest based on a rate by the insurance company Indexed Universal Life - pays interest determined by an external index , such as the S & P 500 . If the index goes up , then interest is paid , usually up to a cap . If the index is negative , then there is usually a floor of 0 - 2 % , so no interest may be paid , but this policy provides downside protection . Variable life - interest is paid according to the stock or bond market . This cash value in a variable policy may go up or down depending on the market .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Variable life works very much like Universal life in concept , except that the accumulation account allows for different investment choices than just a fixed account . A variable life policy will offer different investment choices within the policy . Usually mutual funds are the type of investments used within the accumulation account . The insured selects from the choices offered by the policy . Usually there is something for just about every risk profile . The insured selects for example 3 funds to have the excess premium -LRB- beyond the current monthly charge for insurance and fees -RRB- deposited into . Over time these will gain and they will lose as any investment does . The idea is the same as any investment , to make money over time . A variable life is very much a hands on product . It should be reviewed and possibly rebalanced on a regular basis . Variable life policies are not ' `` fire and forget '' plans .
Universal Life Insurance is good for persons who are looking for a low cost permanent policy that does not accumulate cash value . That is called guaranteed universal life . On the other hand , universal life can be good for people wanting to build up an accumulation of money to `` borrow from themselves '' on a tax favorable basis in retirement . That is called indexed universal life or variable universal life . Universal life is flexible , so is also good for people who want one policy to simply adjust during their lifetime .
Flexible premium adjustable life is the more antiquated title of universal life . Today , there are four different universal life polices. : current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . These three is feature the flexibility or adjust-ability of premiums and death benefit amounts . Guaranteed universal life , in general terms , does not have this flexible feature based on it 's secondary guarantees .
There are two types of life insurance : Term and Permanent life insurance . Term life insurance is for a time certain period of coverage to indemnify your beneficiaries from financial liability . Permanent life insurance is for ongoing financial liabilities that may never terminate . Depending upon your age term life insurance issues at guaranteed periods of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life insurances can mature up to age 121 and some polices actually isle the life of the insured . Permanent life insurance can be classified into two categories : Par whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life has four policy platforms : Guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life .
You ask a good question , but there are too many variables that must be answered first before a reliable answer may be given . First there are a variety of types of `` permanent '' life insurance . There 's Universal Life , Variable Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , and my personal favorite , Whole Life . -LRB- There are also other types , but you did n't add any other qualifiers so I 'm assuming you mean for an individual -RRB- . When a ` type ' is decided on then the questions are : who is to be insured ? What is their age , gender and health condition ? Do they engage in hazardous occupation or avocation ? Then how much insurance ? So in order to answer your question the parameters need to be set by the answers to these questions . Your best bet is to consult a qualified Insurance Adviser who can help you decide on the best product and the correct amount of insurance to meet your goals and needs .
While both universal life and whole life insurance are permanent products and have a death benefit the similarities end there . Whole life insurance has a guarantee premium for the life of the contract and generally is credited by a dividend or return of unused premium . Universal life gas four policy types : current assumption universal life , guaranteed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . With the exception of guaranteed universal life , the others have flexible premiums or death benefit that can be changed by the policy owner .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Kind Of Retirement Plan Is Trs ?
What kind of retirement plan is TRS ? A quick search reveals that TRS is short for teachers retirement system . These are state sponsored plans set up to provide retirement benefits for public school educators in their respective states . The plans themselves may be different in each state as well as different within each state as plans are altered at times for new hires . For example in my state there are currently three plans in action for the teachers retirement . The first was closed to new hires in 1977 and has about a 1000 teachers still working . The second was closed about a decade ago and is very different from the first and the third is still different from 1 or 2 . I expect a fourth to be introduced in the next 5 years .
What kind of retirement plan is TRS ? A quick search reveals that TRS is short for teachers retirement system . These are state sponsored plans set up to provide retirement benefits for public school educators in their respective states . The plans themselves may be different in each state as well as different within each state as plans are altered at times for new hires . For example in my state there are currently three plans in action for the teachers retirement . The first was closed to new hires in 1977 and has about a 1000 teachers still working . The second was closed about a decade ago and is very different from the first and the third is still different from 1 or 2 . I expect a fourth to be introduced in the next 5 years .
The Teachers Retirement System -LRB- TRS -RRB- is a retirement plan for teachers by state , i.e. each state has their own plan with specific provisions and benefits . But it 's basically a defined contribution plan , generally through payroll deductions , so the contributions are pretax and accumulate tax deferred until retirement where distributions are taxed as ordinary income .
That is a GREAT question ! The `` twin '' question to `` how much is right '' , is : `` Which KIND is right '' . There are more than 10 types of Life Insurance : at least 3 kinds of `` Term '' insurance , and at least 10 kinds of `` Permanent '' insurance . Which kind is right for you depends on your goals and needs . That would include your family situation , your financial situation , and what and who you want to benefit . Then when all that is determined the amount of benefit can be determined . A kind of `` rule of thumb '' - taken completely out of context with all the other variables is about 8 to 10 years worth of your annual income . But in reality each situation is unique to the individual client . That 's why personally I take an Education and Fact Finding approach to advising my clients on which kind and how much insurance to implement .
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
What kind of retirement plan is best ? Well the answer really is the retirement plan you will continue to fund right up into retirement . It is n't the plan as much as it 's the effort to save money . What is the point of deciding the best plan allows you to put 25 thousand a year away when you are n't putting $ 5 away ? The big thing is to decide to make saving a habit . Once you commit to that , then you should look at what is available to you and then you look at expenses of who is handling your money .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
The advantages of having life insurance is knowing that your financial obligations will be taken care of and not a burden on your survivor . The disadvantage of life insurance is that for the vast majority the insureds do not match their Survivor 's need for cash upon their death with the ` Right Kind ' of insurance plan . Consider for example : a married insured whose Spouse relies upon their income to sustain the expenses of daily living . What is the ` Right Kind ' of Life Insurance plan and what is the ` Right Amount ' of death benefit ? Term Insurance 's disadvantage is the fact that very few deaths occur in the coverage period . Their need for income remains unprotected . Permanent plan 's disadvantage is the fact that only the wealthy can afford the face amounts required to support a Survivor 's need for lifetime income . Reversionary Annuity by design is the ` Right Kind ' of life insurance plan when Survivor Income is the need . It is much more affordable than Permanent plans and 100 % of the Surviving spouses will receive its benefit .
what kind of retirement plan do I have ? I would say the first place to answer that question would be with your employers 's human resources department . If you are self employed or your employer does n't offer a retirement plan , then the question bacomes more of what do you want for a retirement plan ?
There are a lot of different kinds of annuities available from dozens -LRB- perhaps even hundreds -RRB- of insurance companies . Annuities are offered by insurance companies and primarily used as a means of securing a steady cash flow during retirement years . In many ways , an annuity is very much like a pension plan offered by a company for retirement . Perhaps the best feature of an annuity is safety . Insurance companies are rated as a measurement of financial strength and have proven over the past 125 years or so to have financial stability second to no other type of financial institution . In today 's world where fewer and fewer employers offer a pension , planning for a reasonable retirement income stream seems to be challenging for most workers . An annuity -LRB- or even several -RRB- can provide the type of retirement income security that previous generations have enjoyed . Should an annuity be the only retirement income vehicle for you ? Absolutely not . Your retirement income plan should be balanced in a way that works for you . You should always seek the advice of a qualified retirement income planner so that strategies and products can be tailored to your individual situation .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is a great question ! Recent studies have shown that nearly 70 % of all Seniors will need some form of long term care during their retirement . Unfortunately for many , their retirement savings plan did not include the costs for that long term care . With some facilities costing upward of $ 80,000 per year , far too many Seniors have seen what they thought were adequate retirement savings get gobbled up quickly by those medical care costs . A long term care plan purchased early is a great hedge against those costs , and for the protection of your retirement and insurance funds . I seriously can not recommend strongly enough the value of adding this kind of policy to your portfolio . Thanks for asking !
What kind of retirement plan is a PSERS ? While not familiar with the letters as they may be different in my state , I will assume you are asking about PERS ? PERS is short for the Public Employees Retirement System . It is the pension plan in my state for our public school teachers and has several versions . The first PERS1 was created in 1947 and closed in 1977 . The second PERSII was created in 1977 and closed around 2000 . PERS III is currently in effect and may close in the next few years as legislature moves to reduce their liability to employees for retirement . When these plans close , they do not end , they just stop taking new participants . The state does not lose their obligation to employees and retirees in these plans .
There are two genres of Life Insurance , -LRB- Term and Permanent -RRB- , but there are at least 10 different Kinds within those genres . So your question is a very important one to know the answer to ! Universal Life is most often referred to as Permanent insurance , but it 's really a hybrid of Term and Whole Life ... and it will expire and be void of cash value and any benefits at some point unless you ` over fund ' it . Unfortunately that part is rarely explained to people when buying insurance . The main kinds of Term Insurance are Mortgage , Credit and Life . They 're all basically the same in that they are in force for a limited period of time and pay the benefit amount to the named beneficiary upon the death of the insured . In the case of mortgage and credit policies the beneficiary is the mortgage or credit provider . In the case of Term Life usually the beneficiary is the spouse , children or other relative of the insured . Also with Term Life there may be an accelerated benefit rider that pays a percentage of the death benefit to the insured in the case of critical or chronic illness or injury . There are a large variety of Permanent Life policies available . Whole Life Paid Up at a predetermined age , -LRB- such as 65 , 95 , 121 , etc -RRB- , is the kind that never ` expires ' and continues to grow cash value until the benefit is paid . As mentioned above there are `` Universal Life '' policies , which can be ` fixed ' , ` indexed ' or ` variable ' . Indexed and variable are tied to the stock market with regard to their cash value , but all are a hybrid of term and permanent . There are other kinds of Whole Life designed for business partners , -LRB- Buy out -RRB- , and for businesses , -LRB- Key Man -RRB- , etc. . So when looking to implement life insurance your best bet is to utilize the services of an insurance Adviser who is not tied to just one provider and can be unbiased help you to determine the best policy for your specific needs and goals . Please contact me if you want more information .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
A single K retirement plan is a one participant 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan . It is also called uni-k , solo 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , personal -LRB- k -RRB- or individual 401 -LRB- K -RRB- . It is a special kind of retirement plan for sole practitioners such as consultants , store owners and freelance writers , but is a regular 401 -LRB- k -RRB- with the same rules as any other 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . In the single k retirement plan , the single business owner can contribute as both owner and employee .
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Two questions that are helpful in pointing you in the right direction to find the plan type that 's best for you are : 1 -RRB- do you want the most comprehensive coverage you can get or are you willing to take on a larger share of the risk/costs to keep your premiums down ? 2 -RRB- what is your budget ? maximum dollar you 're willing to spend ? Under the new Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may also want to see if group coverage is available through your employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or youremploymentwas terminated , you lose the coverage . Anindividual plan will stay with you wherever you go . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced broker regarding your coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of products from multiple carriers and work on a personal level with our clients and help them find the coverage that will best serve their needs . Let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much !
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Two questions that are helpful in pointing you in the right direction to find the plan type that 's best for you are : 1 -RRB- do you want the most comprehensive coverage you can get or are you willing to take on a larger share of the risk/costs to keep your premiums down ? 2 -RRB- what is your budget ? maximum dollar you 're willing to spend ? Under the new Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may also want to see if group coverage is available through your employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or your employement was terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced broker regarding your coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of products from multiple carriers and work on a personal level with our clients and help them find the coverage that will best serve their needs . Let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does A Medigap Policy Cost ?
Medigap premiums are determined based on the plan you select , your age , gender and zip code . Most carriers also surcharge for tobacco use and some will charge a higher rate if you are obese . All plans with the same letter are identical in every way except cost . When you pay more you do n't get more , you simply paid too much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
If you want to help fill in the gaps that Original Medicare does n't cover , then you should consider buying Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance . A Medigap Policy can help pay your share of Medicare-covered services -LRB- the co-insurance , co-pays and deductibles -RRB- . Generally , Original Medicare Part A and B only cover 80 % percent of your health care costs , leaving you with the remaining 20 % to pay out of your pocket -- unless you have a Medigap Plan . If you have a significant health issue arise , twenty percent can get hit your budget pretty hard . A $ 3,000 procedure will cost you $ 600 in co-insurance . A $ 10,000 procedure will cost you $ 1,000 . Surgery costing $ 100,000 will leave you with a hefty $ 20,000 bill . Some people believe they should wait until their health dictates a need for Medigap insurance . Unfortunately , waiting is not the best option as you may not qualify for Medigap insurance once you `` need '' it . Medigap insurance companies are not bound to the Affordable Care Act , so they can ask health questions -LRB- unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation or your initial Open Enrollment period -RRB- . Your Medigap application will have to be approved through the medical underwriting department . To find out if you are in your initial Open Enrollment or a Guaranteed Issue situation , you can work with an agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance or call Medicare directly . If you do qualify , you 'll be able to buy a Medigap Plan in your state and not be required to answer any health questions . If I can assist you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
A Medigap policy plugs the gaps that Medicare A & B does n't cover . A person can get a Medigap plan part of what Medicare does not may or they can get a Medigap plan to cover all of what Medicare does not pay . The cost varies depending on which plan a person chooses .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
It depends a lot on which Medigap Plan you have . Medigap Plans are designed to cover most of what original Medicare Part A & Part B does not cover . However , all Medigap Plans do not have prescription drug coverage . You would need to get a Part D plan in addition to cover prescriptions . This is a good thing because you will be able to change your drug plan as your prescription needs change without needing to change your Medigap Plan . Medigap Plans also do not cover dental and vision , however , you can get a separate dental/vision plan . The quickest way to find out what Medigap Plans cover and is to go to our website . You can compare Medigap Plans instantly online at SummitMedigap.com .
Since all Medigap plans are standardized , the benefits are exactly the same with every insurance company . This means that Medigap Plan F with ABC insurance company is the exact same Medigap Plan F with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is price . Medicare does not regulate the price of Medigap Plans ... just the benefits . That 's why there is such a competitive market . Many Medicare Beneficiaries like the idea of purchasing Medigap through a well known insurance company , but that does n't mean you are going to get the best price . Medigap is not like health insurance for under age 65 where a Medical director approves or denies your bills . Medigap payments are made by the insurance carrier if it 's a Medicare approved item because they have to -- it 's the law . I suppose that was the long way of saying there is n't one insurance company that has the best Medigap coverage . They all offer the same standardized plans and pay the bills based upon CMS regulations .
Medigap and Med Advantage plans are SIGNIFICANTLY different . For a MedAdvantage Plan , they are basically like an HMO . You have a primary physician who is essentially the gate keeper . You do need referrals and you do have co-pays . A Med Advantage plan does also contain a drug plan component , which the supplements do not . If you have significant health issues , than of course the co-pays can add up , however the monthly premium is usually significantly less than the average Medigap plan . Medigap Plans again , are significantly different . The coverage provided by a Medigap Plan is dependent upon what plan you get . The plans are all identified by a corresponding letter . For example , an F Plan tends to offer the most solid coverage , but of course the price is among the highest as you 'd expect . Each lettered plan is written and designed by the government , so no F Plan is different than another , no G is different than another G , etc etc. . What is different is what each individual insurance company charges for the play . So it 's not uncommon for company A to charge 1 price for an F Plan , and companies B , C , D , & E all have significantly different prices for the exact SAME COVERAGE . One thing that I would do is make sure you understand how each lettered plan works , because the difference in coverage can be quite significant . For example , make sure you understand exactly what a `` Part B Excess Charge '' is . In some states , such as PA , they are illegal , but in my state , which is NJ they are perfectly legal . If you purchase a plan that does n't cover the Part B Excess Charge , you could find yourself pleasantly surprised by a significant bill if you ever have a major procedure done . Medigap Plans DO NOT come with a drug plan , or vision plan or dental . A Drug Plan is the only one you are REQUIRED to get , or you could face a penalty by the government . But again , the drug plan must be purchased on the side , as there is no such thing as a Medigap that comes with a drug plan .
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans cover the gaps in cost that Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- does not cover . Medicare Part A & Part B only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medigap Plan is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- all or a portion of that other 20 % , depending on which Medigap plan you have -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it limits the expenses a senior can be exposed to by creating a very predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medigap plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Yes , Medigap is worth the cost of the monthly premium . Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the cost of your healthcare . The remaining 20 % does not have a cap . You pay 20 % of everything with no max . Why would someone subject themselves and their family to that when they can have $ 0 out of pocket or very little with a Medigap Plan ? A Medigap Plan will cover what Medicare Part A & B does not . Depending on what plan you go with you could have little to no out of pocket . It is far easier to budget a monthly premium knowing you will never have a large expense come when you least expect it .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplements , also known as Medigap policies work in addition to your basic Medicare A and B coverage . Anything that is covered by either of those can then be applied to the Medigap plan to pick up some or all of the remaining costs . Inpatient dialysis is a Medicare A procedure . Outpatient or home dialysis options are covered by Part B . This does not include any costs for home health aides , lost wages , housing or blood supplies not included in the doctors visit . Depending on your Medigap policy , some of these may be covered . Your Medigap policy handbook will tell you if your plan covers these additional costs .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Evaluate Life Insurance Companies ?
A lot of it depends on personal preference and what your concerns are . If you want to make sure it 's with a top-rated company who is financially strong and stable , you want to look at what their rating is -LRB- e.g. A.M. Best ratings : A , A + , and A + + indicate superior financial ratings -RRB- . If you 're looking at permanent , long-term coverage , you may want to look at the most stable companies because you want them to be there for the next 50 , 60 , 70 , years . If you 're only looking for a 10-year term insurance policy , you may be willing to look at a company with less favorable numbers because their rates are cheaper . It can also be helpful to look into reviews that people say about the company - positive aspects , any major continuous issues with claims , etc. ? The other major thing that everyone looks at is pricing - your premiums that you pay . There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' life insurance policy . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . This is because people may qualify for different risk classes -LRB- one of the single-most critical things to think about with coverage -RRB- , they may be looking to secure a different amount of coverage , keep the coverage for a different length of time , or may live in a different state -LRB- not every product from every carrier is available in every state -RRB- . All of these factors go into the calculation of rates . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies and make sure that the policy you apply for is best serving the desired needs that you want to have the coverage in place to protect .
How long have they been around . How quickly do they pay . How difficult are the to deal with and/or approve a claim . Do they have a local agent you can actually see , talk with and meet with . Is that agent actually interested in what is best for you . Do they have the type of policies you need and are looking for . Are they interested in covering someone like you , and with the health issues you might have . What are their rates and can you afford the coverage you need . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Great question ! When evaluating an insurance company , here are some things to look for : First , their financial stability - Standard and Poors , and AM Best are companies that rate the financial soundness of companies . Look for anything in the `` a '' range as being very financially stable , and capable of paying your claim . Look at the complaints filed against the company - do they have a pattern of issues paying claims , or denying them ? Lastly , are the applications and brochures clearly worded ? Do they make sense to you ? Are the agents of good quality ? Once you get comfortable with these questions , then look at their prices , coverage , and policies . If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
In evaluating Term Life Insurance , make sure that the policy is guaranteed , not just assumed to be guaranteed . By this I mean , check to see if the premium is guaranteed to not go up for the entire term , and that the face amount will not go down for the entire term . Evaluate the life insurance company , to make sure it is rated at least A by AM Best . Finally , evaluate the agency you purchase the policy through , to see if they are trustworthy , have a lot of complaints , and will be available to help you with questions or service requests down the road . Clues as to reputability for online agencies are how long they have been in business , whether they introduce staff members on their web page , if they are part of the Better Business Bureau , etc. . If you cover those three bases , you should make a good choice in term life insurance .
You would need to start by contacting a life insurance agent who can assist you in being evaluated for a life settlement . I say contact an insurance agent because he/she may have other options to help you reach your goals or free up some extra cash -LRB- e.g. reducing the face amount -RRB- . If a life settlement does appear to be the best choice , you will be evaluated for life expectancy , and your policy will be evaluated for features that make it desirable to viatical investors . Life settlements work the opposite of life insurance : the shorter it appears you have left to live , the more money your policy is potentially worth to investors . Term policy has no cash value , so investors will only be interested in a policy that has more years left than you are expected to live , and/or is able to be converted to a permanent policy .
When evaluating long term care insurance , you will be given a spreadsheet of 2 or more companies ' products to compare . This makes it pretty easy to compare similar features of each policy . You will want to evaluate the companies : their rating , their rate hike history , whether they have a disproportionate number of claims against them . You can check the cost of care in places that provide long term care in your area , to make sure you are not buying too much or too little coverage . And here is a helpful evaluation sheet to examine different features of your policy : WEBSITELINK
Over the years car insurance providers as well as providers of other insurance solutions , have evolved their underwriting review practices in order to better evaluate the risk they are being asked to insure . Many years ago things like the color of a car or whether it had 2 or 4 doors would affect the premiums paid . These days , hoewever , insurance companies are much more sophisticated intheir evaluation rocedures and many have included credit history when evaluating an applicants ; request . Simnilar to one 's driving record and accident history , a credit report can help an insurance companyu to better understand the risk factors of one 's life style . Thus , a better credit history , along with a clean drigving record , hepls an insurer to feel more confident that they are insuring a person less inclined toward risky decisions .
To sell your insurance policy , you would contact a company that specializes in `` life settlements '' . They will first evaluate your policy to see if there is any value in it to a potential purchaser . This evaluation also includes an evaluation of you , because they are counting on you passing away within a few years in order to make a profit . If yours is a policy in which they are interested , you will fill out an application and they will see if there is a settlement that everyone can agree on .
Annuities are rated by independent financial rating companies . These companies specialize in evaluating and assigning a rating to different types of Financial Companies & Issuers . The main companies that do this are Standard & Poors -LRB- S&P -RRB- , Moodys , Fitch , A.M. Best , Weiss , & Comdex . It is important to know that each company has it 's own rating scale . And rating scales can also differ depending on which type of financial company is being evaluated . S&P has the easiest to understand rating scale ; AAA , AA + , AA , AA - , A + , A , A - , BBB , BB + , BB , BB - , B + , B , B - then the same for C then D and then F is default .
How to evaluate a long term disability plan ? It all comes down to the definition of what disability is . The best policies use the fewest words to define what disability is . The more words beyond that one sentence are really exceptions to the first sentence . The definition should be short and to the point . That is where you start and actually finish your evaluation . Why ? because the rest of the information does n't matter if you do n't qualify or if your qualification ends after a couple years .
A life insurance underwriter is someone who evaluates the risk of issuing a policy based on many factors , of which the main one is life expectancy . The person making this evaluation used to write their name under the definition of the risk , thus came the title , `` underwriter '' . It is a very difficult job as life insurance carriers have many regulations to follow , they must charge wisely so their company stays solvent , and they must know a realm of health information in addition to being astute financially . Therefore , there are often underwriting teams , including medical doctors , when a life insurance company covers a broad range of risk . Not only do underwriters look at medical risk , but since 9-11 they also must be sure that the face amount applied for fits the financial means of the applicant , because life insurance can be used by terrorists for money laundering . They look at pharmacy records , driving records , and MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- . Some policies do not require any exam or medical records , some skip the exam but still have the option to order medical records , some just order exam and rarely order medical records , and some routinely order both . All these steps together ensure that the proper rating is given and that the life insurance company will be able to pay all out all its claims .
Most insurance companies require the homeowner to carry insurance that covers the cost of reconstructing the home . This can be a great deal different than the current market or assessed value of the home . Companies rely on independent evaluation programs and adjust the amount of coverage annually to reflect the increased cost of reconstruction . Get another evaluation done to see if that is the source of your problem .
A Life Insurance Blood Test evaluates the risk you pose to the life insurance company based on your mortality , which is measured in part with a blood analysis.Here are the chemistry items being evaluated . Glucose , Fructosamine Glycated Albumin -LRB- AGP -RRB- , Blood Urea Nitrogen -LRB- BUN -RRB- , Alkaline Phosphatase , Total Bilirubin , SGOT -LRB- AST -RRB- , SGPT -LRB- ALT -RRB- , Gamma Glutamyl transferase -LRB- GGT -RRB- Total Protein -LRB- Albumin and Globulin . -RRB-
There are thousands of accidents each day across the nation . These accidents are analyzed in great deal to identify the causes and conditions that lead to accidents . The data is evaluated in close detail and in some states the insurance companies can charge by age and sex . Going to that pile of data , they can determine exactly what it costs to insure a large group of 19 year olds with two years of driving experience . In other states , California being one , you are only allowed to evaluate on driving experience , not age . The important thing is that the rate is based on actuarial data . It isnt that someone has an axe to grind against young drivers . Young drivers simply cost the company more to insure .
The cheapest auto policy is the one that completely pays a claim . That company will make you whole when you have a loss . No matter how much or how little you pay , that company is the cheapest , and it just happens to be the best because it pays your claim . We want to evaluate insurance by its price but the real test is the way it pays your specific claim .
Although credit is amopng the underwriting tools that a company uses to evaluate a homeowners risk , there are others . Prior loss history , proximity to fire services , certain breeds of pets , amount of dwelling coverage required and alarm systems may also come into play in that evaluation . I have not seen a case where credit alone was a reason for acompany to deny coverage . I have seen many cases where one 's credit score did have an impact on the amount of premium charged , however .
Disability Income Insurance evaluates health factors , so the cost of the policy will depend on how the applicant is rated health wise . If a nonsmoker who is of normal weight and has no health history , Preferred ratings can be given . The price also depends on the risk of the occupation , how much income the applicant makes -LRB- and how much of that income they want to replace in case of disability -RRB- , and what bells and whistles they want on their policy . For a 40 year old male office worker who makes $ 60,000 per year , the price can be as good as $ 50 per month for a plan that will last to age 65 .
The key to comparing Medicare Part D plans is evaluating the drug formulary . It does n't matter if you have a Medicare Advantage plan that includes drugs or you are evaluating a separate Part D plan , you must compare the drugs on the formulary . Medicare.gov has a drug formulary finder which is beneficial .
The question , `` How do I determine how much life insurance do I need '' is one that should be asked by everyone and re-evaluated every year or so . Why ? Because things and circumstances change . There are a number of formulas that are popular with insurance sellers , so the answer you get will depend on who you ask . I would ask you , `` how much do you need for WHAT ? '' In other words : what is your goal for your insurance ? If you have over $ 5.2 million in assets you may want your life insurance to protect your heirs from the tax liability of your estate . If not and your mortgage and credit is all paid off , you may just want your beneficiary to be able to maintain the life style you 've provided for them for the rest of their life . If you still have a mortgage and credit bill you may want to make sure those are all paid in the event of your demise . Or your `` what '' may be a combination of things . That is why you need to work with an agent who will truly look out for your best interests and ask you the right questions .
Evaluating an insurance company includes looking at their financial history , how swiftly they pay their claims , their financial ratings and reputation , years in business . New York Life is America 's oldest and largest life insurance company , with the highest financial ratings from all bureaus and the quickest pay history . Check our reputation . We are the company you keep .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Drainage ?
Home insurance covers damages . An all risk homeowners policy covers many perils , however it specifically excludes some . Among these exclusions in most policies is earth movement and intrusion of water from outside the residence . Homeowners insurance does not cover wear and tear to any component of the house , including the drainage . For example , if a drainage pipe were damaged in a fire , it would be covered . If the same pipe failed , it probably would not be covered . Incidentally the damage caused by the failed drainage pipe might be covered .
Home insurance covers damages . An all risk homeowners policy covers many perils , however it specifically excludes some . Among these exclusions in most policies is earth movement and intrusion of water from outside the residence . Homeowners insurance does not cover wear and tear to any component of the house , including the drainage . For example , if a drainage pipe were damaged in a fire , it would be covered . If the same pipe failed , it probably would not be covered . Incidentally the damage caused by the failed drainage pipe might be covered .
It will , but it also depends upon where the water came from . If there is a heavy wind and rain storm and the wind damages your roof , causing rain water to leak in and damage the inside of your home , there will be coverage for that . If on the other hand , the heavy rain does not causedirect damage to your home , but raises the water table in your property , which causeswater to leak into your basement , it is possible that there would not be any coverage for that because ground waterdamage is usually excluded under a homeowners policy . Be sure to ask your insurance professional about coverge for failure of any sewars or drainage systems like curtain drains or sump pumps . If you have such coverage , then you will be more likely to be covered if your basement fills with water as a result of any failure .
There is a type of coverage available in the United Kingdom that is known as Home Emergency insurance . The policies provide coverage in rather specific areas , such as boilers , plumbing and drainage . The premiums are usually quite affordable . This is not the comprehensive homeowners insurance that is popular in the United States . This form of coverage would not likely satisfy a lender .
It is always a good idea to talk with your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . It may be possible that this coverage is included or can be included in your policy . If your Home Insurance company offers an optional coverage extension to protect from loss due to the failure of a drainage system , the coverage may be found in that extension .
It may be possible , but it depends upon the source of the water and the terms and conditions of your policy . If for example you have suffered water damage because a pipe failed , then in most cases this would be covered . It is common that damage caused by ground water seepage is not covered , however , talk to your insurance professional to see if your insurance company offers an endorsement that provides protection from the failure of a drainage system . Any coverage available through your Homeowners policy would , of course , be subject to your deductible .
One word - No . Damage caused by Flood is a specific and extremely common if not universal exclusion in Homeowners policies . Though it may be possible to endorse your policy to cover damage caused by a failure of a drainage system , there is no endorsement for flood . That protection is only available by purchasing a Flood Insurance policy
Sewer Backup Coverage is an essential coverage on Homeowners Insurance policies . On standard Homeowners Insurance policies , the coverage usually can be purchased as an optional endorsement ; in many cases , the carriers will offer $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 per incident for a premium of $ 20 - $ 75 per year . On High Value Homeowners policies , the coverage may be included in the policy form and in some cases offer coverage at the same limit as other perils covered under Coverage A - Dwelling . Sewer/Drain backup coverage will provide coverage should your drains become blocked and the water backs up causing water damage to your home . It is always important for a homeowner to check the drains annually and make sure that the water runs quickly through the drainage system without any obstacles ; there are liquids available for purchase at hardware stores that advertisethe clearing of drains but it may be more prudent to contact a plumbing professional for the best advice ! You may contact your insurance carrier to add this valuable coverage to your current policy or you may obtain a quote with the coverage included . For quotes in Arizona , California & Nevada , you may follow the link : WEBSITELINK
The answer to this question is a resounding `` no '' . Damage caused by flood is always excluded from a standard Homeowners ' Insurance policy . There may be ways to endorse coverage for water damage caused by a failed drainage system , but this is not flood insurance . Flood Insurance protection can only be obtained by the purchase of a separate Flood Insurance policy through a program managed by FEMA and more than likely available through your Insurance Professional .
Generally speaking , no . However , it is always important to check with your Insurance Professional about the particular points in your Homeowners policy . Some company 's policies may include coverage for damage caused by the failure of a sewer or drainage system . This can include anything from a sump pump to a curtain drain to gutters and downspouts . There would still need to be a determination by a claims professional as to the source of the water .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
Home Insurance may cover appliances in home ; there are 2 types of appliances , those that are fitted and those that are free standing . Fitted appliances constitute part of the Dwelling Coverage on the home insurance policy , whereas , free standing appliances may be covered under the Personal Property Coverage on the home insurance policy . The perils covered under a home insurance policy must be reviewed regarding the damage to the appliances . For example , Fire , Smoke , Lightning & Water damage may be covered on the policy which would also carry forward to the appliances . Regarding free standing appliances , the policy must afford coverage for Personal Property . If this question was intended for the reason of upkeep and maintenance of appliances , home insurance policies are not intended to repair or replace appliances due to maintenance and/or breakdown . Home insurance is intended for sudden and accidental losses which could cause financial hardship to the homeowner . If you wish to cover your appliances , you may wish topurchase a Home Warranty Contract from a small handful of carriers who offer a maintenance contract ; in this case , you will pay an annual premium as well as a Service Charge for each call when a repair company is dispatched to take care of a covered maintenance situation . If your question was indeed regarding perils covered on a homeowners policy , you may wish to contact your local agent and review the coverage on your policy or WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your coverage for you at no charge .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Homeowners Insurance and Title Insurance are not the same . Title insurance is insurance to make sure the title of the home is clean . For example you are purchasing a home from Mr. Doe . The title company is to make sure all information is accurate such as who is the seller , boundaries are correct and so on . If you purchased the home from Mr. Doe and you find out later there also was a MS. Doe who says I never gave permission to sell the home now there is a problem and title insurance would step in to cover this situation . Homeowners insurance is what you purchase to cover your actual dwelling and property , liability etc. . . for a potential loss .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Get Health Insurance If I Donate A Kidney ?
Yes , you can still get health insurance . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- requirements that do away with medical underwriting and make policies guaranteed to be issued and prohibit pre-existing condition exclusions , rate-ups and/or waiting periods from being applied to health insurance policies should guarantee you access to coverage . Having donated an organ or being on a waiting list to donate an organ can not be taken into consideration .
Yes , you can still get health insurance . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- requirements that do away with medical underwriting and make policies guaranteed to be issued and prohibit pre-existing condition exclusions , rate-ups and/or waiting periods from being applied to health insurance policies should guarantee you access to coverage . Having donated an organ or being on a waiting list to donate an organ can not be taken into consideration .
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
In Canada , in most cases , life insurance premiums are not deductible . There are a couple of exceptions : 1 . If the insured is applying for a loan and the institution lending the funds requests that he or she buy life insurance as collateral , a portion of the premiums on that policy qualify as a deductible expense -LRB- the Net Cost of Pure Insurance -RRB- 2 . Where a donor donates a life insurance policy to a charity or a charity takes out a policy on the donors life , the premiums paid by the donor will be considered a charitable donation eligible for a charitable tax credit -LRB- for individuals -RRB- or deduction -LRB- for corporations -RRB- . Even though it is not deductible there are several situations where corporate owned life insurance should be considered . For example : The insurance is required to fund a buy-sell agreement , there will be more than one insured shareholder . There will probably be different ages and unequal premium rates . There may also be cost differences among shareholders due to underwriting premium ratings . Corporate-owned policies help to equalize the resulting premium differences . The taxpayer with the lowest tax rate requires less pre-tax income to pay the premiums ; their dollars are cheaper . In many cases that could be the corporation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . -LRB- Since tax laws vary by jurisdiction and do change , check with your local tax and professional advisors . -RRB- Note : The information contained in this article is intended to provide general guidelines only . The application and impact of the law can vary widely from case to case based on the specific or unique facts involved . Accordingly , the information in this article is not intended to serve as legal , accounting or tax advice . Users are encouraged to consult with their professional advisers for advice concerning specific matters before making a decision .
I believe a well-balanced , personalized portfolio is the best for young people . Young people should think about purchasing term insurance due to the fact you can get a lot more for lower premiums . They should also consider whole-life life insurance . Young people should also consider such products as : annuities , long-term care insurance and disability insurance etc. . Term insurance is a good product to cover expenses in case something happens to the young person before the whole-life life insurance has a chance to mature . How many times have young people been killed in car accidents or diagnosed with some form of a terminal illness ? Then the family has to put little jugs and jars around in businesses asking for donations to cover the final expenses and other debts . That is not a time for embarrassing situations like that . That is a time for mourning and for family gathering together . Whole-life life insurance is a great product due to the fact the premiums do not change over the life of the insured . These products , if set up correctly and under current tax laws , allow the insured to pass on a legacy to his heirs tax-free . Annuities are great products for young people to start so they can plan for retirement . When you are ready to retire it is to late to start planning . Long-term care insurance is great in case you need some form of assisted living at any stage of your life . Disability insurance is great in case you get hurt and can not work but you need money for shelter , food and other bills . I am not suggesting you purchase all of these products at one time . I do recommend you meet with a licensed insurance professional and get a good foundation built . Then add to your portfolio over time . Keep in mind these products are generally less expensive when you are young . It is kind of like building a house . You do not want to start with the roof and work down . You should really start with purchasing the land , looking at blueprints , checking out contractors and pulling permits etc. . Then you form the foundation and build upwards towards the roof . To your prosperity .
You sure can toke and get life insurance ... . kinda ... Do n't take all our answers as a 100 % YES that you can ... . Since the time of the last posts , a LOT has happened politically around the subject of weed . Some life insurance carriers have lightened up on their guidelines as well . If you like a little bud from time to time , HERE ARE THE TIPS I have wen looking for life insurance : 1 -RRB- BE UPFRONT . You 're going to have to pee in a cup and donate a little blood . So do n't lie . Tell the agent you smoke !! 2 -RRB- Be honest about how much & how often . How much and how often is very important when picking the right carrier . If you have any more questions , reach out !! - gravy
Rich people may buy life insurance for many reasons . Here are some : 1 . Business succession . E.g. . A son getting a life insurance policy on his father could enable him to buy the business when his father passes . 2 . Taxes . Life insurance can be purchased to pay taxes and/or to avoid having to pay some taxes . 3 . Charity . Leaving life insurance to a charity maximizes the donation and allows the donor to not have to pay it in a lump sum . 4 . Tax deferred retirement income . Indexed Universal Life is a great tool for this . 5 . Almost unlimited contributions . Life insurance and annuities do not have the caps that some investments have .
Life insurance provides your beneficiaries , business partners and charitable organizations the financial peace of mind knowing that they are taken of if your demise occurs . A non-modified endowment contract life insurance with minimum death benefit held for the life of the insured can generate tax advantaged distributions . And life insurance can play be a financial leverage in paying estate taxes , charitable donations and making a difference in your childrens and grandchildrens future .
Life insurance is used to pay for funeral and other final expenses ; to borrow from for college , wedding , new home , etc ; to provide cash to a business partner when the other partner dies so the surviving partner can buy the other share of the business ; to pay off a mortgage ; as collateral to get an SBA loan ; to pay off student loans ; to pass an inheritance to children or grandchildren ; to donate money to charity ; to provide for loved ones so they do n't have to move and take another job when the breadwinner dies , and many other uses .
It is a challenge to come up with the money to bury someone who does not have life insurance or cash saved up for that event . Even with good intentions , savings can become depleted , putting family and friends in a difficult position . Most of the clients we 've had who have been involved in that type of situation , said they have taken up a collection among the family to bury their deceased relative . However , there are a few sources where you can help supplement funeral and burial costs . Social Security will pay a lump sum of $ 255 for a funeral if the deceased person qualified for SS benefits . Veterans can be buried for free in one of the nation 's 131 national cemeteries , and there are burial funds available for some eligible veterans . Read the criteria for receiving these benefits here : h WEBSITELINK Funeral homes like to be paid quickly , but you could reimburse those who donated after holding a sale of the deceased person 's belongings . Or perhaps memorials given could be applied toward the burial costs . Keep in mind that you can take out a policy on a parent , grandparent or other person for whom the costs of burial might fall on your shoulders . They just have to agree to and sign the policy . Perhaps if they understand the hardship being uninsured can put on their loved ones , they might consent to taking this step .
Single people can use life insurance for many purposes . Perhaps they want to leave an inheritance to a favorite relative , or a donation to a favorite charity . Life insurance is a tax favorable way to pass wealth to another person or group . They may have debts that they want to pay off in a quick and simple manner with the cash that life insurance provides . They may want life insurance so that a business partner can buy their share of the business upon their death . Life insurance is also a good resource for paying funeral expenses . It does not go through probate and is awarded in a fairly quick time frame . Single people often choose to take out some extra final expense life insurance coverage to help pay for the costs associated with settling their estate .
Yes , Medicare will provide coverage for a kidney transplant . Please note , how Medicare pays and how long the coverage will be for can vary based on a number of factors such as if you 're under 65 and on Medicare due to End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- , if you 're 65 or older and already on Medicare , etc. . There 's a guidebook on Medicare 's website that provides the specific coverage guidelines for each situation regarding kidney treatments called `` Medicare Coverage of Kidney Dialysis & Kidney Transplant Services '' . The link to the page is below : WEBSITELINK You should have both Medicare Part A & Part B in force and I would highly , highly recommend having a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in coverage Part A & Part B do n't cover . In short , your Part A & Part B coverage only covers about 80 % of the expenses . That other 20 % can become a very high dollar amount after all is said and done . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's an easy one . You are alive and presumably have either family , friends , someone you love or care very much about , belong to a religion or religious group or charity or other public cause . If there is someone or something you would like to give money to or make a donation to , they you should have life insurance . It will make sure you can fulfil your dream of protecting and giving . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Would n't that be nice if it were ... Unfortunately , it is not unless you have named a Qualified Charity as the Irrevocable Beneficiary . So , unless you have a special charity you are looking to donate to , Life Insurance is Not Tax Deductible . But the good news is , the Death Proceeds are in most cases , Tax Free ...
The face amount of a life insurance policy is based on financial justification , i.e. you need supporting documentation to substantiate the death benefit amount you 're applying for . You need to total all your indebtedness including your mortgage , future obligations like your children 's education , charitable organizations that depend on your donations and your human earning capacity until retirement .
How much life insurance should you have on a nurse 's salary ? Well are you married ? Single ? Have kids ? Have debt ? want to own something that builds equity ? Lots of questions to your question actually . So the answer is going to be depends . ;-RRB- What would you like the policy to do ? Cover debt , build cash values , take care of your animals , donate to your school where you picked up your nursing degree ? The thing is there really honestly is n't a single answer for your question until you figure out what matters to you and what you want to happen if you 're not here or come home everyday for decades .
Who `` needs '' life insurance coverage ? Anyone who has someone who would be financially adversely affected by their demise . That would include anyone upon whom the burden of final expenses would fall . This would also include creditors who would bear the unpaid balances on loans . A person who wants to leave a donation or legacy to a person or organization , but whose estate would fall short of the amount desired to be passed on would also fall into the category of one who needs life insurance coverage .
This is the $ 64,000 question , isnt it ? -LRB- And the answer , by the way , is not $ 64,000 of coverage ; nor should you have to pay $ 64,000 in premium . But some people do , and it is well worth it . -RRB- That is a very important consideration . Life insurance premium is money well spent . Each dollar of benefit literally cost pennies . If you get the best rate available , then it costs you a few pennies . If you qualify for a higher premium , that it costs you a few more pennies . In either case , it is an extremely economical way to make sure your heirs and beneficiaries get all the money they need , exactly when they need it . Having said that , I have a very simple philosophy when it comes to determining the face amount . When it comes to taking care of your family , be generous . Losing you will be an incomparable trauma for them . Financial stress and strain would really hurt them . Even having to reduce their standard of living somewhat will cause distress . Give them enough money to live well . It wont take you too much time to calculate just how much money would be needed to accomplish that . When it comes to leaving money to your favorite charity , be prudent . A life insurance benefit could represent a substantial donation to them . They need to have demonstrated a high measure of accountability and responsibility in managing their finances , to qualify for a great gift . Give them enough money to make a difference and take a few good strides towards fulfilling their purpose . And considering spreading your wealth around to various good causes . When it comes to taking care of your business obligations , be exact . Have your accountant crunch the numbers to make sure your partnership agreement is adequately funded . Determine the value of your key people and make sure your company is indemnified against their loss . Account for any and all debt , and make sure there is enough coverage to take care of it . Your business should be able to flourish without you . If you have built it correctly , new leadership should be in place , and the money should be there , for the show to go on . That is successful entrepreneurism .
A child is not an economic unit . Quite the opposite , however , the loss of a child can have a financial impact on the family . This is rarely the motivation for the purchase of life insurance on a child but if you drive the city streets often you will see people asking for donations to help bury a child . It is sad but it does happen . Most people who purchase life insurance on a child are trying to secure coverage for a lifetime at an early age in order to set a very low premium for the coverage and to avoid the possibility that the child might become uninsurable in the future . My brother became uninsurable at about age 22 . This is an issue that concerns many . Life insurance plans are often seen as savings vehicles to accumulate money for future requirements . It is probably not the best way to save money for a college education but it does provide a systematic way to set aside money and for that money to grow free of current taxation . The life insurance policies available to children often have a rider that allows the child to purchase additional life insurance at specific times in the future without proving evidence of insurability . This can be extremely important .
Life insurance is a superb tool for making your mark on the world even after you pass away . Lets suppose youre a family-first type of person . Your spouse , your kids , your grandkids mean everything to you . You want all your assets to go to them - the house , the business interest ... all the stuff you have built and accumulated and enjoyed throughout your life . If you dont take proper precautions , Uncle Sam could grab a good chunk of that when you die . But if you plan properly , it can all go to your family . And life insurance can take care of Uncle Sam . Putting life insurance in place could enable you to keep all your assets intact for posterity . And it could help you satisfy your estate tax obligations for pennies on the dollar . It is a good deal . And you know what else you could do with life insurance in your estate planning ? You could make significant donations to charity . Because the premiums are so low compared to the benefits , you could spend not a lot of money but have a huge impact on the good work of your favorite nonprofits . Think about the difference you could make in the world by helping your favorite religious/political/social / medical research group . Perhaps you could fund the research needed to in eliminate cancer . For good . All with a life insurance policy included in your estate !
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Should I Be Paying For Renters Insurance ?
The amount that you pay for renters insurance could vary greatly based on the many factors that are used to determine your premium for this coverage . Based on my experience within my geographic location for ten thousand dollars worth of coverage you will pay approximately seven to ten dollars per month . If you have your auto and renters insurance with the same carrier you may also be eligible for discounts on your policy premiums .
Renters insurance is relatively inexpensive . In fact when companies offer discounts on auto if you have homeowners insurance , check to see if they extend that same discount to renters . The discount frequently exceeds the premium for the renters policy . You should pay for enough coverage that you will be able to move into another apartment with all the furniture , clothes and appliances you had in the one that was destroyed .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
A renter should have renters insurance to protect your assets , personal property and loss of use . However unless required by a landlord to carry renters insurancethen renters insurance is an option . I recommend you check with your auto insurance provider about obtaining renters insurance policy since in many cases the multi policy discount will off-set the cost of renters insurance .
Most reputable companies offer renters insurance and it 's very reasonably priced . Call your agent who handles your auto insurance and they should be able to help you . And , if they use the same company for your renters , you should get discounts off of both saving you quite a bit of money . Here are some things to consider : Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- , and your liability . Two things to get right : Use a tool to estimate what it would cost to replace your stuff . Notice I said `` replace '' . You can get insurance that would pay you the depreciated value of your stuff but , in my opinion , it 's worth a little bit more to get your stuff replaced with new . Your agent should have a tool to help you or you can use the one on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like the tool -RRB- . Pick a liability limit that will cover all your assets . I usually wo n't go below $ 300,000 and I usually recommend at least $ 500,000 . The price difference is usually below $ 10/yr . It 's well worth it . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust to do the best for you and take their advice . In the long run , you 'll be happy you did .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
Always . And the landlord should request evidence of the existence of the renters insurance . Reason number one : Under the personal liability coverage of a renters policy the carrier agrees to pay the sums the insured is legally liable for as a result of bodily injury or property damage . What type of occurrencescould be involved ? A guest in the renter 's apartment slips on a wet bathroom floor , falls , and is injured . This is bodily injury . The tenant leaves a pan of oil on the stove unattended and a fire results damaging the building . This is property damage . Reason number two : Unless legally liable , the landlord is not responsible for the tenant 's business or personal property -LRB- for things like fire , theft , mysterious disappearance , etc -RRB- The tenant should cover their own property with insurance like a renters policy .
I am not quite sure what your asking , so I will answer this question , which is what I think you asked : `` What are the standard coverages included in a renters policy ? '' The standard coverage in a renters policy includes personal property , liability and medical payments . Personal property can be general property and scheduled property -LRB- i.e. jewelry , cameras , hearing aids -RRB- on premise ; and , sometimes , there can be a sub-limit for personal property off-premise . Liability covers your negligent acts against a third party . Medical payments provides a small sum of money to people who hurt themselves at your rented premise . I hope this answers what you were asking .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
How Old Do I Need To Be To Get Critical Illness Insurance ?
Some carriers will issue critical illness policies on children , but usually only as a dependent , not the primary insured . As a general rule anyone age 19 or older can apply for a critical illness policy . Not all critical illness policies are alike . Be sure to get one that is health insurance , and not a rider to a life insurance plan .
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
This depends on the amount of money that you have saved to cover the costs associated with the immediate needs of a critical illness . If you have funds available to cover medical expenses of a critical illness , you may not need critical illness insurance . If you do not have the extra funds , than critical illness insurance can keep you from financial ruin .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
In sports there are `` odds '' ... What are the odds of hitting a hole in one ? An average golfer on a 200-yard par-3 : 150,000 to 1 . Odds of myself or David/Ted -LRB- above -RRB- ... one in TWO ... Ladies are lucky ... it 's only 1 on 3 ... So yes , `` cancer insurance '' is a great protection plan to own . Let 's compare Cancer insurance to protection plan that is growing in popularity , Critical Illness -LRB- CI -RRB- . Cancer insurance covers ?? ... . YES ... ding , ding , ding ... cancer . Most benefits are paid out on a scheduled basis . Meaning you get `` so much for each item eligible for a claim '' . Each treatment/service has a named value : Chemo - So much per treatment . Surgery - a specific amount . Hospital stay - A specific amount per day . Possibly more for ICU . & it goes on ... . Critical Illness pays a lump sum upon diagnosis . There is no need to continually update the carrier about treatments , surgeries , & hospital stays . Think of it as upfront money vs. trickling in over time . Since Critical Illness Insurance typically ahs a benefit for Cancer , heart attack/stroke , and other life changing illnesses -LRB- like blindness & paralysis -RRB- , the one policy can do a lot more for you over a lifetime . Which is better , Cancer or Critical Illness insurance ? As you will see in many of my posts ... UNDERWRITING is the key . Always buy the most coverage for your monthly premium dollars based on the underwriting . - gravy
Critical illness is a specialized form of what used to be called `` dread disease '' coverage . More comprehensive than a simple cancer plan , critical illness policies normally pay a lump sum benefit on first diagnosis of listed medical conditions including heart attack , cancer , stroke and another 3 - 7 named conditions . Most carriers do not issue critical illness after age 65 or 70 . Buy a health insurance plan , not a life plan with a critical illness rider .
Generally , critical illness insurance is not a taxable benefit . The money that is used to purchase critical illness insurance has already been taxed , since critical illness insurance is not tax exempt as a medical expense . Thus , the benefits paid if the critical illness policy pays out , are not taxable .
Life insurance covers you in the event of death . Critical illness covers you while you are alive , providing cash to care for the extra expenses involved with a critical illness . Some life insurance policies offer a critical illness rider that will pay a portion of the death benefit while you are still alive . if you are diagnosed with a critical illness
Accident and Critical illness insurance are similar in structure , but cover different things . Both policies will typically pay out a lump sum or up the benefit amount directly to the insured or a provider of their choice . The difference however is that accident plans only cover medical expenses associated with an accident where as critical illness insurance pays lump sum upon diagnosis of a major critical illness . Make sure to read the list of covered critical illness ' in the policy before purchasing .
The marketing brochure for the critical illness product you are looking into should clearly state which specific critical conditions are covered under the policy and any situations that might trigger a partial payment under the policy . For example , generally , critical illness policies will at least cover heart attacks , strokes , certain organ transplants and usually cancer . Depending upon the company and the policy it markets there may be other conditions it covers or there may be situations where certain conditions will trigger only a partial payment of the policy 's face amount . You should carefully study the marketing materials you are presented , ask for clarifications of how the policy will work in any circumstances you have any questions about and , if possible , you might want to do some comparison shopping . All critical illness policies are not created equal and there coverage , benefit amounts and costs can vary significantly from insurance carrier to insurance carrier .
People who buy critical illness insurance are those who have a genetic predisposition to certain illnesses based on family history , smokers -LRB- who have increased risk for getting some diseases -RRB- , those who have had loved ones with critical illnesses and have seen the impact firsthand , and those who do not have savings on hand to pay for the costs that come with this type of diagnosis -LRB- loss of work , travel , child care , bills -RRB- . All type of people buy critical illness insurance .
If you have a critical illness in your future , and will have received a lump sum of money to get you through that process of treatment and -LRB- hopefully -RRB- recovery , you will have thought it is worth it . No one knows the future . To some , having the knowledge that such a benefit would be provided if they are diagnosed with a life threatening illness , is worth it . To others , that is not such a big deal . Whether it is worth getting critical illness insurance or not is really a person decision . That being said , there are many more survivors of critical illnesses now than in the past . So it is a risk worth considering .
If you have a family history of any of the illnesses covered by Critical Illness Insurance , and if paying the premium for the policy is not a problem for you , getting Critical Illness Insurance could be a good move . We all know people who have developed cancer , stroke , etc and their Critical Illness policy has pulled through for them with extra cash at a very traumatic time . When those diseases run in the family , having this coverage can also supply peace of mind .
Critical Illness insurance is a specified disease based coverage meant to provide a tax free , lump sum face amount up diagnosis of a covered illness.There are several insurance carriers who offer this coverage and as you can imagine , each carrier covers different conditions . That said , there are a select few States where the Department of Insurance has not approved Critical Illness insurance for sale within that specific State . Anyway , of all the conditions covered ... the most important are Heart Attack , Cancer and Stroke . Not to downplay the seriousness of other diagnosed conditions but nearly 80 % of all claims that will get paid from these policies are due to those three conditions . Each carrier offers coverage for other conditions . Some carriers offer coverage for 21 different conditions , while other carriers may limit their coverage to 4 or 5 conditions . Please understand that when looking into Critical Illness coverage , the most important thing to look for is not just what conditions are covered but how they are covered . The benefit definitions are a major consideration and it is `` critical '' -LRB- pardon the pun -RRB- to know the benefit definitions prior to purchase . There are carriers who provide a stroke benefit but will not pay a benefit unless the neurological deficit of the stroke persists for 30 days ... whereas there area few carriers who will pay a stroke benefit once the neurological deficit persists 96 hours . I hope this helped answer your question .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is A Good Estimate For Homeowners Insurance ?
Great question . A home insurance policy cost on average about $ 300 - $ 900 a year . It also depends on a multible factors such as your home location . The age of your home . And some companies check your insurance score to determine price . Good Luck you may also want to call your local independent agent for a quote .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
There are several forms of homeowners insurance . The HO-3 is the most common form and it provides replacement cost coverage for the residence . Most insurance companies will require that you insure the home to its replacement cost . There are services that estimate the cost of replacing your home . The insurance companies normally accept their estimates . If you feel the estimate might be too high , many insurers will insure to a value that is guaranteed by a local contractor . If the contractor states that he can replace the residence for a specific amount and guarantees that for a period of time , the underwriter might issue a policy for that amount .
To estimate the cost of homeowners insurance , ask a neighbor with a similar home . If there is a home built by the same builder nearby you might be able to estimate a premium based upon the relative value of your home and the other home . This is a very rough way to estimate the cost but should help .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
That is a great question ! A life insurance quote is like the estimate that you would get before having repairs done on your home or on your car . The estimate gives you an idea of what the expected cost of the repairs will be , and the insurance quote does the same thing . It is the expected cost of your insurance . Both estimates can be on the mark , or different depending upon what the company finds when they start looking closely at the work . In the case of life insurance , that would be your medical history , the underwriting decisions , and the prescription history that you have . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
The deductible is the amount you pay when you have a claim . What happens is the insurance company adjuster will estimate the damage -LRB- sometimes they ask you to get estimates from contractors -RRB- , and arrive at a total amount to do the repair . They subtract the deductible from the repair total and pay you what is left . Some companies have specific wind/hail deductibles or other coverage specific deductibles , so you should refer to your contract for what your deductible is .
I can not speak for all insurance companies , but in my experience insurance companies will do either one of two things . 1 -RRB- Accept the estimate prepared by the mechanic . 2 -RRB- Send an insurance adjuster to look at the damaged vehicle to prepare an estimate . The estimate is based on cost of labor and parts .
If you are seeking to estimate how much life insurance you need , many people purchase 10 times their annual salary as a life insurance face amount . Others use life insurance calculators to more accurately determine that amount . If you are trying to estimate how much your life insurance would cost , you can do that by going to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes . There you can put in different face amounts and term lengths to at least estimate the cost of term coverage , although most quote engines do now show permanent options , and the rates will depend on your health .
Good question . Yes , typically insurance is included in escrow , but you need to communicate with your lender to see if they have included the insurance premium in your estimated payments -LRB- if you are purchasing a home . -RRB- A lot of people include their homeowners insurance into their escrow account . I would contact your lender to see what your house payment will be with and without your insurance premium included in escrow . You may be required to escrow yourinsurance depending onthe terms of the mortgage . I hope this is helpful . If you have any additional questions about homeowners insurance please let me know . Have a wonderful day ! Best , Josh DeBoer 918-582-8206 fdands.com WEBSITELINK
I generally agree with David 's answer . But I would add a few more items to consider . What your agent is developing in a Replacement Cost Calculator is only an estimate . The actual replacement of home depends on a number of factors that might change by the time loss occurs . For example we can identify that building one hose back in the instance of a total fire loss will likely cost more than the original building costs were when the builder may have building an entire subdivision . Yet losses to insured homes can be substantially more than expected if an entire city shares the same loss . That is what you get in some tornado or hurricane events.The fact that so many are affected increases do to shortage of materials and labor . So , here is what I recommend : Get as close to a number that you and your agent think represents the total replacement cost . Then buy an Extension of coverage . Many companies sell this at increments of 25 % ,50 % or even 100 % . What the extension does is move the limit to a higher level of protection at the time of loss if needed . An example would be to take the estimated replacement cost of 300,000 up to 375,000 in the event more coverage is need on the home at time a of loss and a 25 % extension has been purchased .
A renters policy provides coverage for damage that is the result of a covered peril . Since there is a wide variety of forms this can not be answered for every case , however , most policies list windstorm or hail right after fire and lightning . These are the fundamental coverages contained in most policies . The coverage has some limitations . The company will normally not pay for loss to property inside a structure , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water , all whether driven by wind or not , which enter through an opening not made by the direct force of wind or hail . The company is not likely to pay for the loss to watercraft and their trailers unless inside a fully enclosed building . Smaller water craft normally have coverage . If your property damage is subject to ordinance or law , such as a connection for an appliance , there might be a limitation on the increased cost of replacement that comes because of that law or ordinance . If the hurricane causes landslides or erosion , damage to your personal property arising from that movement of land might not be covered either . The same is true if the damage comes from flood water or tidal waves . This exclusion applies whether it is caused by wind or not . If the hurricane interrupts power supply the insurance company probably will deny coverage on any loss that result from that cause , for example rotting food in a freezer . If you are running a business out of your apartment , the company will probably exclude any loss that comes from that business to include interruption because there isnt power or people can not reach your apartment . The chances are quite good that if a hurricane strikes your apartment , that your renters policy will replace your property up to the limits of the policy . This is when you find out how good your coverage is . If you have appropriate limits you could be fully restored , minus the deductible . It is very important to have the correct limits for coverage on your renters policy . To make sure that you have adequate coverage take a picture of everything that you own inside your apartment . Then make a chart showing the property and the estimated cost of replacing the property . When you add up that list you will have the amount of coverage you should set as a limit for your policy . The pictures and estimates should be stored off-site in case that hurricane becomes a reality . Hurricanes often result in a loss of life . While that might seem remote , this might be a good time to consider what will happen to those that you leave behind . A quick inventory of debts would be a good thing to have handy . If you can eliminate debts and pay for final expenses you would be a great help to those that you love . Every weekend we see people on street corners seeking donations or offering car wash services so they can pay the expenses for a loved one . It is sad but it can be avoided with just a small amount of planning .
All that you need to estimate renters coverage is a camera . Take pictures of everything that you own in the unit that you are renting . Systematically list the items and estimate the cost of replacing each individual item . Add the estimates and you will have the replacement cost of your personal property . That should be the amount of coverage you purchase on a renters policy . The other part is liability and my recommendation is always , buy the highest limit that the company offers . A lawsuit is extremely expensive and can ruin you financially .
The only way to receive accurate estimates for yourself is to contact a few insurance agents in the area you 're considering purchasing a home . An insurance agent can provide a quote for a property you 're considering purchasing . Home insurance rates can vary greatly based on geographic location , the individual home and the individual homeowner . The average monthly cost of 20 homeowners in Austin TX might be $ 100/month , but the average monthly cost of 20 homeowners in Houston TX might be $ 200/month because of the greater risk of hurricanes .
Great question ! The short answer is that it should , assuming that the damage was n't caused by some form of negligence . The thing to consider though , is this - how much was the estimate for the repair of the damages ? Would it be less than the cost you will incur if / when your premiums increase after filing a claim for that damage ? For example - the estimate to repair is $ 200 . You file a claim , and the company pays it , and then increases your premiums by $ 30 , let 's say . Your cost for insurance that year now is increased by $ 360 -LRB- 30x12 = 360 -RRB- . It cost you $ 160 to get your $ 200 work done for you . It is the same situation with auto insurance and accident claims . Be careful , and contact your agent , or other homeowners , and get an idea of what the rate increases are . You may even find that they have a `` forgiveness '' type of clause where it wo n't raise the rate . Hope that helps ! Thanks for asking !
Life insurance quotes are an estimation of the premiums you would pay for a given life insurance coverage structure -LRB- face amount and term length -RRB- . However , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . So if you run a quote at the most preferred rates and have n't factored in your height/weight , medications used , medical conditions , family medical history , tobacco usage , driving history issues , participation in extreme/hazardous activities , and a number of other factors , then the quote figures you ran are pretty much useless as they do not represent an accurate picture for the proposed coverage . The risk classification is the MOST IMPORTANT part of any quote an insurance agent gives you because the risk classification determines the premiums for the coverage . The final risk class a carrier approves you at after underwriting your policy will tell you what premiums the carrier will require for the coverage to be active . Many individuals like to see quotes with the most preferred rates -LRB- preferred plus risk class -RRB- as they are the cheapest cost and then they end up thinking that 's what they should get -LRB- and if they do n't get it , then they will forget the entire process and not even bother securing any coverage at all -RRB- . What you apply for is not always what you get - not everyone qualifies for the best rates . For example , if you have a major medical condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack , diabetic , had cancer , etc. -RRB- and the quote that was ran was for a preferred plus risk class , you 're wasting your time applying for it because every carrier is going to offer a higher risk class -LRB- and therefore require higher premiums -RRB- for the coverage -LRB- or possibly decline or postpone you for coverage depending on the details of the medical history -RRB- . This is why it 's critical to work with an experienced , knowledgeable , independent life insurance broker who knows the right questions to ask and can shop the case among multiple companies so they can give you the most accurate quotes up front that represent a realistic expectation of what you can expect to pay for the desired life insurance program . An important note : You NEVER want to just apply to a bunch of companies to see what sticks as this actually works against you because it 's a red flag to insurance companies when they complete the MIB check during underwriting -LRB- Medical Information Bureau - every carrier checks this because if you were declined by other companies , they want to know why -RRB- . You want to have your best -LRB- and most accurate -RRB- estimate up front so you get it right the first time so you can get the best rates for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The average cost of a homeowners insurance policy is going to vari from one geographic area to another . In my area I estimate that the average cost for a homeowners policy is about 700-1000 / yr.Homeowners insurance will vary depending on home values , claims history for the area , and many other factors . Contact your local agent to find out what coverage is available in your area and the cost associated with it .
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is It Legal To Not Have Homeowners Insurance ?
Yes it is legal not to have homeowners insurance . If you have no lender to satisfy then it is in within your right to self insurance your property . If you feel you can handle any potential loss on your home by all means feel free . Keep in mind should you decide down the road to get insurance again and you have gone without referred to as a lapse or gap in coverage you will find potential challenges in obtaining coverage 's again as insurance carriers use this as part of their underwriting criteria .
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
life insurance claims are usually filed by the immediate family members , or benificiaries who are of legal age . When the policy is sold a folder is given along . with papers in order to identify where the policy information is kept . Depending . on the agent and company . Life policies are equivalent to wills are very involved in the estate . If you dealt with a good agent then you would have been assisted with this form of estate planning . The policy is mentioned in the will or there is a known location as to where the policy is kept . The claimants must be the beneficiaries of legal age . If the beneficiaries are under the legal age are named then the probate will handle the claim.until they become legal . It is always best to name a beneficiary of legal age if you have younger children for this reason . . Beneficiaries can be changed anytime during the policy and only by policy owner .
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
Having a tree removed for maintenance purposes is not covered by you 're Homeowners ' Insurance . That having been said , If that tree has been determined to be dead or diseased and might threaten your neighbor 's house if it fell , for example , and you do nothing about it , then if that did occur , you would be legally liable for any damage and subject to coverage under the Liability portion of your Homeowner 's policy . That would pay for the damage and legal fees , if necessary , and perhaps the clean up , but it is a good idea to discuss this with your Insurance Professional .
-- > Normal 0 Basic homeowners policies provide coverage in three general areas . They agree to indemnify you for the cost to repair or replace your home or your personal property should it be damaged or destroyed . They agree to indemnify you for your increased expenses should your home be damaged or destroyed and you are required to live somewhere else while your home is being repaired . They agree to provide you a legal defense and pay some or all of certain civil judgments should something you do or fail to do injure or damage someone . Obviously each area has its own limitations which are outlined in 40-50 pages of words some of which are subject to legal interpretations but for the most part this is the type of coverage you will find in most homeowners ' policies .
That varies considerably . However , the cost of not having a homeowners policy is easier . If you dont have a homeowners policy , your mortgage company can buy one for you . If you dont have a policy and someone sues you because they hurt themselves on your property , you get to pay all the legal costs and perhaps the full amount of a judgment . If you house burns down and you dont have a policy you will only have memories , and perhaps and on-going mortgage . The price of a homeowners policy has many variables and you should discuss it with an agent that you trust .
First , I am not exactly sure what you mean by legal assistance , so I am going to answer the question I think you are asking . When you get car insurance you get coverage for injuring third parties , which is typically called bodily/physical injury coverage . Many times , this coverage includes defense costs in the event you get sued for injuring a third party . The limits of your legal defense costs can go one of two ways : either the defense limits are included within your limits or there is a separate limit for defense costs . There are advantages and disadvantages to either method . If the legal defense costs are included in your limits you will have defense costs until the insurance company pays out the limits of your insurance . If you have a separate limit then your legal defense ends when the attorneys fees use up that allocated amount . Either way you do n't have unlimited defense , but if it is a serious bodily injury you will lose the `` free '' attorney much quicker . I hope this helps !
Let me put it to you this way , if I may . If you do n't have a mortgage -LRB- which would require you to have and maintain a Homeowners ' policy -RRB- , and you are fortunate enough to have the complete financial where with all to fully rebuild your home if it were totally destroyed , and fully replace all of your belongings at the same time , you do n't need Homeowners Insurance . LIkewise , if you were financially sound enough to settle any law suit that might be launched against you as a result of the serious injury or death of another person or damage to their property caused by you and for which you are then legally liable , you do n't need Homeowners Insurance . Talk to your Insurance Professional . A well thought out and executed Homeowners policy would provide coverage for you for these types of potential losses for literally pennies on the dollar . Why do you need it ? The question is why would you not want it ?
Lets say you have a hundred friends and each has an automobile . If they could agree that they wanted to have enough money to pay legal expenses that they might have if they are responsible for an accident , you could form an insurance company . If you were able to determine -LRB- from actuarial studies -RRB- the amount of money you could anticipate spending in helping each other out in the coming year and the amount was $ 50,000 you would then know the basic share for each friend , $ 500 -LRB- $ 50,000 / 100 -RRB- Someone in your group will probably object because they only take their car to shows once or twice a year and certainly dont have the exposure the rest of the friends have . Another will object because they live on a farm and rarely drive into town -LRB- although it might be a long ways . -RRB- They will contend that their exposure is less than the other friends . Another friend will complain because one of the friends has a street-legal racing car and it is more likely that it will be involved in an accident . One of your friends has a drinking problem and no one really wants a share of his legal liability . And so it goes . What at one time seemed simple and logical becomes increasingly complex . Actuaries are a rare group of people who compile data and have the ability to slice that data in many different ways to determine the effects of the location where the car is garaged , average annual miles , credit risk of the owner , make , model and year of the vehicle . In fact , these actuaries can compute over 100 rating areas for an automobile . The point that this exercise makes is to distribute the risk that all of us face equitably . I have been asked if a red car costs more to insure than others . I am sure that a study somewhere has shown that red cars have a slightly higher than average accident rate . It is something that could be used in the rating process . I have been asked if a previously totaled car , now registered legally can be insured based upon that same concern for a fair premium . So actuaries give the insurance company many alternatives upon which they can design a rating scheme for an automobile . In my state the scheme is set by state law . Actually the California Constitution dictates how automobile policies will be rated . So legislative action can have a profound effect on automobile rating . Most states give authority to their insurance commissioner to regulate automobile insurance rates . Their charge is not so much to maintain fairness as it is to make sure that the companies take in enough premiums to pay the claims that are anticipated . In other words , the commissioner does everything in his or her power to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . Insurance companies keep very close tabs on the claims that they pay and the premiums that they take in . Actually the actuaries get involved in this as well , to determine if they are charging enough for every different type of coverage . When the company fails to receive enough premiums to pay all of the claims in a given year , they approach the commissioner and propose a rate increase . At this point the company has done everything possible to spread the risk appropriately , however , there are some areas that they want to adjust to make sure that the company is being fair and that the company can continue to keep its promises . That is how a company computes what it will charge you for your car .
At what age can you get life insurance ? Usually `` you '' can purchase life insurance from the age of 18 on . Life insurance is considered a contract and in order to have a binding contract both parties must be of legal age . An insurance company can not contract with a 10 year old or a 15 year old legally . So how did my kids get life insurance before age ten ? Because I `` own '' the policies as their parent . I had an insurable interest to insure my kids and I went into a contract with an insurance carrier . My kids are simply the insured and because at the time of purchase they were not of age to be party to a legal contract , they can only be the insured until 18 and I could sign over ownership at that point in time .
Sure thing . People do it all the time . Why do they use a trust ? You certainly want to talk to an estate planning attorney about that . Get legal expert advice from a legal expert . But , I can tell you a few things as someone with many clients who have used a trust in their life insurance planning . Its a great way to keep large amounts of money out of your estate , and therefore out of the sights of the taxman . Estate tax bills can be a huge ; fortunately , legitimate legal tools such as trusts are available to minimize the bite . A number of trusts are available for use . Which one would be best , given your circumstances ? Ask your attorney . -LRB- And by the way : make sure its an attorney who specializes in estate planning . A lot of money is on the line here , and you want to make sure you get the best advice possible . Your real estate or commercial lawyer may be a good guy , but he doesnt have the specialized knowledge that an estate planning specialist has . -RRB- Remember that when you use a trust , you lose control . The trustee runs things . Thats why your choice of trustee is a key management decision . Give this a lot of thought . Ask your attorney about the legal and fiduciary responsibilities of a trustee . He or she can be liable if the policy inside the trust does not perform as outlined . This brings up the all-important function of a life insurance policy audit . On a regular basis , that policy should be reviewed to make sure it is meeting expectations . The cost , the benefit , and the guarantee period on the premium should all be verified . For example : what if a universal life product was used , but due to a price increase , the coverage will terminate 10 years earlier than scheduled ? Not a good situation . You dont want to be in a situation when the policy will have failed right when a claim is supposed to be filed . This means that your broker , your trustee , and your attorney need to buddy-up and work together to make sure your insurance trust and the policy it holds are doing their job .
If you are walking down the street and a pack of dogs attacks you , your homeowners insurance will not cover it . This would be a claim on your medical insurance . However , if you own a dog and your dog attacks someone not a member of your household , your homeowners liability coverage may cover the resultant medical and legal expenses . `` May '' is the operative word as some homeowners insurance companies exclude dog bite liability for all or some breeds . And even if yours does not exclude , they most certainly will following filing the 1st dog bite claim under the philosophy of where there 's smoke , there 's fire . One incident is a good indicator that another is likely . Talk to your insurance professional for your specific coverage or lack thereof !
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
This is probably a situation where you will want to get some legal advice . I have seen cases explained where it went both ways . The answer to your general question , however , is that the policy does not actually go into effect until the first payment is made and required delivery paperwork is received . What happens so often during life insurance underwriting is that you are not speaking with the person who makes the ultimate decisions . The fact that they told you to send in the first payment sounds like a good move on their part , so that base would at least be covered . But the legalities have to then go by their teams who make those complicated decisions . And far too often , auto generated memos go out without taking into account the whole situation . I say this not as an excuse for insurance companies , but just because we run into this a lot , where their letters have not caught up with current reality . If they had said your husband 's policy was in effect on the day of his death , I think you would have a strong case . But with it being an approval letter , and then how it went down afterwards , I could not say . It certainly can not hurt to ask a legal expert who can advise you , though . Best wishes and my condolences at this difficult time .
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
A homeowners policy is a legal contract . Your part is to pay the premium . The company guarantees to pay for damages to your property , both the residence and the contents when the damage is the result of specified perils -LRB- i.e. fire , wind etc. -RRB- up to the limits of the policy . There are specific perils that are excluded , most notably , flood and earthquake . There are also limits to recovery for certain types of property -LRB- i.e. fire arms , and Jewelry . -RRB- The policy also provides legal defense and payment of claims against you for personal injury and bodily damage lawsuits . The coverage is limited by the policy declarations . There are additional coverages such as debris removal , loss of rents , and others .
Homeowners Insurance usually includes Personal Liability coverage listed under Section II on the Declarations Page . Personal Liability will usually cover a legal case brought against the insured and direct family members in the insured household due to negligence . It is important to read the coverage definitions , limitations and exclusions to assure that coverage will be afforded for each specific case . If there is a case of a Slip and Fall incident due to the negligence of a covered person , it is likely that coverage exists ; however , this will be determined by the adjustor assigned to the specific case during examination and interpretation of coverage on the said policy . It is never a good idea to assume coverage without the complete legal interpretation of both the policy and the specific case presented .
Entering business without appropriate liability insurance can result in financial consequences that will dwarf the premium that would be required to have coverage . Just because he is 16 years old will not relieve him of the financial responsibility in the event of an occurrence where someone is injured or property is damaged . I do n't buy into the notion that insurance gives a business credibility but I do agree that it is the best single method of protecting assets and the future ability to earn a living . At 16 years old , another issue develops and that is whether or not he meets legal requirements to start or open a business or can entered into contracts . And , because your son is not of a legal age , will his parents or legal guardian be responsible for any losses that occur in the operation of the business ? If a case can be made for the inclusion of parents or guardians into a claim or lawsuit , the stakes just went up dramatically . So , insurance is a minimum necessity . One other thought . Insurance carriers may not insure your son because of his age , but they are more likely to concern themselves with the combination of his age and lack of business experience . Many carriers having the best rates have the requirement of at least a few years of experience . While coverage may be available in a specialty insurance marketplace , our best carriers will generally have issues with a 16 year old new business customer first entering and insuring a business . Once again , a parent might be necessary to make the business insurance happen . But back to your question : Absolutely a yes on the need for insurance . Good luck .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Dental In Colorado ?
Medicare does not cover dental care in Colorado , as a rule . Only if the oral care is needed to treat another general health condition , or to prepare the mouth for treatments involved in treating another general health condition , is dental treatment covered by Medicare in Colorado or the other 49 states .
Seniors in Colorado can get a dental plan in addition to a Medicare Supplement plan to cover dental related expenses . Some plans even have dental , vision and hearing all in one plan . A good plan would give immediate coverage for dental exams , cleanings , extractions and fillings . Some plans do not have a network so you can go to any dentist you like .
Medicare does not cover dental care in Colorado , as a rule . Only if the oral care is needed to treat another general health condition , or to prepare the mouth for treatments involved in treating another general health condition , is dental treatment covered by Medicare in Colorado or the other 49 states .
Seniors in Colorado can get a dental plan in addition to a Medicare Supplement plan to cover dental related expenses . Some plans even have dental , vision and hearing all in one plan . A good plan would give immediate coverage for dental exams , cleanings , extractions and fillings . Some plans do not have a network so you can go to any dentist you like .
Every state is a bit different however In Colorado , where I am located , car insurance is mandatory for all drivers . Auto insurance is enforced by the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies which is part of the Department of Insurance . Colorado was a no-fault state until 2003 , when they changed the regulations to what is referrd to as TORT meaning fault has to be established first before claims will be paid .
Since Medicare covers people over the age of 65 , and those with certain disabilities that have received Social Security benefits for 25 months , it would be very rare for Medicare to cover a circumcision . It would be possible , if someone with Medicare had a true medical need to be circumcisized later in the life , but very rare , as most circumcisions are done at birth . Given the fact that 40 % of births in American are covered by Medicaid , a better question may be `` Does Medicaid cover circumcisions ? '' That varies by state , as 18 states currently do not cover this procedure , primarily due to the fact that it is most often elective , or not necessary . the 18 states that do n't cover circumcisions , along with the year they stopped : Colorado 2011 South Carolina 2011 Louisiana 2005 Idaho 2005 Minnesota 2005 Maine 2004 Montana 2003 Utah 2003 Florida 2003 Missouri 2002 Arizona 2002 North Carolina 2002 California before 1999 North Dakota before 1999 Oregon before 1999 Mississippi before 1999 Nevada before 1999 Washington before 1999
To answer this question on how much do agents make in Colorado i would like to recognize the opportunity you have . We all know it depends on how hard you work but the key is to become a master marketer . Colorado has many opportunities with small businesses , families and individuals . The retirement niche is a growing market with a lot of opportunity . Contact a local marketing organization like to get more details .
The cheapest long term care insurance company in Colorado varies according to the person who is applying . Some companies are better at older ages ; some are better for couples . Some are better for -LRB- or are the only ones that will take -RRB- certain health conditions . Some offers certain features at a lower price than others . To find the cheapest long term care insurance for you , contact an agency that sells a variety of long term care companies in Colorado and review your health and all the features offered with a knowledgeable agent . Together , you can work out which has the lowest price for what you qualify for and what you need .
The premiums for life insurance in Colorado vary widely . Age is big factor , as a younger person can get a policy at just a fraction of what a senior person would pay . Gender , health , tobacco , driving record , substance abuse , and dangerous hobbies or travel all affect the price . Then add to that the fact that shorter guarantees contribute to a lower price , and it truly is impossible to answer this question without more information . To find the cost of a Term life insurance policy in Colorado , you can go to a website that offers instant quotes and input different criteria . That will give you an idea of what prices are .
Auto insurance is required to register your can and to legally drive in Colorado . If you are caught driving without proof of insurance , the fines are extensive -LRB- as shown in Colorado Statute 42-4-1409 -RRB- : Four points against your driver license . First offense : minimum $ 500 fine , and license suspension until you can show proof to the Division of Motor Vehicles that you are insured . Second offense : minimum $ 1,000 fine and license suspension for four months . Third and subsequent offenses : minimum $ 1,000 fine and license suspension for eight months . Courts may add up to 40 hours community service to the above penalties .
Medicare does not cover `` dental '' . While `` Medicare Advantage '' covers some `` preventive care procedures it does not cover extensive dental procedures . There are `` dental '' policies available the coverage is usually limited to $ 1000 per year . In most cases dental maintenance is best planned to have preventive cleaning done each year plus any required `` dental filling ' each year but then if you need more extreme procedures you will probably spend a chunk of your vacation funds in the dental office
Unfortunately , Medigap does not cover routine dental examinations . Although Medigap Plans are designed to fill the gaps in Original Medicare , they will only pay for Medicare-covered services . Routine dental care is not covered under Original Medicare ; therefore , it is also not covered by Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- . Medicare will only pay for dental services that are an integral part of a Medicare covered procedure . Some exceptions include , reconstruction of the jaw following accidental injury , or extractions done in preparation for radiation treatment involving the jaw . Medicare Beneficiaries often purchase a separate dental plan to meet their individual needs . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- does not vary by state . Plan F in Florida is the same as a Plan F in Colorado . However , the monthly premium can be different from state to state . Medicare Advantage Plans can vary by state because of the network , etc. . The plans are based on which county you live in and different counties have different plans .
A Medigap Plan F only covers a dental service if Medicare covers it . Routine dental care is not covered by Medicare . Some procedures may be covered under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. you had to go to the emergency room and it was medically necessary to repair something in your mouth immediately -RRB- - you can check with Medicare if you 're not sure if a given procedure would be covered . One of the ways carriers differentiate themselves is by offering `` value-added services '' . Value-added services regarding dental are simply discounts on dental services - not dental insurance . Medigap plans are standardized meaning the plan itself is exactly the same , regardless of the carrier you buy it from . If you want coverage for routine dental services such as checkups , x-rays , fillings , etc. , you would need to add a separate dental insurance plan to provide coverage for routine services . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare generally does not cover dental or vision . However , there are certain conditions when Medicare may provide some coverage - this is generally when it 's an integral part of a covered procedure . For dental , Medicare may provide some coverage when it 's an integral part of another procedure , such as procedures conducted during a hospital visit , covered under Part A. Routine checkups , cleanings , fillings , etc. are not covered by Medicare . For vision , Medicare will cover some preventive and diagnostic eye exams such as for glaucoma or macular degeneration . Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare . You can purchase a separate dental and/or vision insurance plan through an insurance agent/broker .
Colorado as a state does not require you to have renters insurance . However , many apartments & homes alike which are available to rent may require you to have renters insurance . This kind of insurance is very affordable and is recommended for everyone who rents . Be sure to look at the policy however . I would recommend getting the insurance which gives you replacement value vs. current value . Will cost you a little more but well worth it .
Medicare Region C includes the states Alabama , Arkansas , Colorado , Florida , Georgia , Louisiana , Mississippi , New Mexico , North Carolina , Oklahoma , South Carolina , Tennessee , Texas , Virginia , West Virginia , Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands . This and other regions are designated for the purpose of supplying Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- for Medicare .
No , Colorado does not require health insurance companies to allow someone to join an insurance policy just because they are in a relationship . However , your girlfriend can purchase a policy on her own , and you could help pay the premiums if you would like . Ultimately , in the vast majority of cases , the cost of her coverage would the same whether she was added to your policy or if you purchased the exact same plan for her individually . In that regard , there really would not be any advantage at all to adding her to your plan .
Technically you ca n't in all but a few states . To form a group under the regulations of virtually all states you have to have an employer-employee relationship which at a minimum requires two people , the employer and at least one common law employee -LRB- generally a W2 status employee -RRB- . Colorado and Delaware do appear to be states that make provisions for a self-employed person to purchase health insurance on agroup contract basis . This is one of the issues the Affordable Care Act essentially dealt with beginning on January 1 , 2014 when it 's provisions eliminated pre-existing condition exclusions and being declined for coverage in the individual and group marketplaces . So , other than the fact that the open enrollment season concluded on March 31st , 2014 there is now no legal prohibition preventing a self-employed person from getting individual health insurance . This does not mean , however , that states have changed their individual laws regarding eligibility for group contracts and to the best of my knowledge no states have changed their policies in this regard . There are still a few industry association group health plans in existence but they have become increasingly rare over the years . For most self-employed persons reading this answer your best option and generally your only option will be to purchase individual health insurance .
You would be best served to assume the answer to this question will be `` No '' , especially if you are over age 18 . Vision exams , eyeglasses and contact lenses are generally covered under a separate vision insurance plan if your employer offers one or you choose to purchase coverage in the individual market . There are certainly some self-funded employer health plans and union health plans that include vision coverage in the major medical package but these are relatively rare . An area of confusion and frustration for many businesses and individuals who are purchasing health insurance plans that meet the minimum essential benefits requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that it requires that PEDIATRIC dental and vision services be covered under the major medical plan . Of course , some people just hear the dental & vision part and think it applies to adults enrolled in the plan -LRB- it does n't -RRB- . The other big surprise can be how the pediatric dental & vision benefits are structured in the health plan . Preventive dental and an annual eye exam should be covered at 100 % . After that , the coverage can vary wildly from one insurance carrier to the next . Some design their pediatric dental & vision benefits like standard vision and dental insurance plans that people have been accustomed to . However , it is not uncommon to find that non-preventive pediatric dental and vision services are subject to the major medical plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , technically your child 's eyeglasses may be covered but if you have a $ 4000 deductible you have n't met then in practical terms this will mean your child 's eyeglasses will be an out-of-pocket expense .
end question
start question
annuities
What Happens To My Variable Annuity If I Die ?
All annuities are legal contracts . A feature of an annuity is that it designates a beneficiary . As an annuitant you select who any money owed you should be sent upon your death . Reviewing these designations is extremely important . If your beneficiary and contingent beneficiary predecease you , proceeds will then be paid into your estate and distributed by the probate court .
That is a great question ! Depending upon how you set your annuity up at the beginning , your annuity will either continue paying your spouse , go to whomever you named as a beneficiary -LRB- or to your estate -RRB- , or to the company . If you chose lifetime payments , they stop when you do , and anything left in the account goes to the insurance company . If you chose income for a guaranteed period , it pays for that period , or until you pass , and the balance goes to your beneficiary . If you chose lifetime period certain , then the payments are guaranteed to last a certain number of years , even if you pass -LRB- the payments continue to your beneficiary -RRB- , and then stop at the end of the specified period . If you chose joint and survivor , the payments continue until you both have passed , and whatever is left goes to your beneficiaries . Complicated ? A little bit , that 's why a good agent or advisor is needed . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Does your child need life insurance ? Well there will be an answer for everybody and they may not be the same . I purchased life insurance on my children . Here are a few reasons why ... . if one of my children were to die , I do n't think I would be able to go straight back to work on Monday as if nothing happened . I would n't want to have the price of the headstone and service costs get into the pain my wife and I would be experiencing . Imagine telling your wife `` that costs too much '' for the headstone she wants for your child . I also bought for positive reasons too . I purchased whole life so they have permanent insurance working hard at a low cost for them . They have solid cash values and life insurance to take into adulthood .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
The best time to have Life Insurance is at the time of death . Unfortunately we do not know when that will be or how it will happen as we look into the future . If you had a crystal ball and knew exactly when and how you are going to die , then you would get the cheapest insurance for the highest death benefit you can afford . So , the question is what will happen to my family if I die tomorrow ? At age 65 or later . If you have children , then your priority is probably with providing coverage until they become the adults you want them to be . Term Life Insurance is a good solution for this type of coverage . If you are older , perhaps it is more of a Final Expense approach or perhaps an Estate Planning coverage with Permanent Life Insurance providing the best solution . Here is the catch : the older we get , the more health history we have , the higher the premiums will be no matter what kind of Life Insurance you get . It is all about planning for now and for the rest of your life .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Carpenter Ant Damage Covered By Homeowners Insurance ?
A standard homeowners policy contains exclusions . One of the normal exclusions is for damage to the building and/or the contents caused by birds , vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . Carpenter ants are insects . However , the policy will often pay for collapse of a building or a part of a building caused by hidden insect or vermin damage . This isnt talking about settling , or cracking .
In the event that the carpenter ant was the culprit that caused water damage to occur -LRB- by means of damagingdishwasher water lines , sprinklers , etc. -RRB- , not otherwise excluded , coverage would be provided for the damage caused as a result of the water . However , not to repair the appliance or system .
A standard homeowners policy contains exclusions . One of the normal exclusions is for damage to the building and/or the contents caused by birds , vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . Carpenter ants are insects . However , the policy will often pay for collapse of a building or a part of a building caused by hidden insect or vermin damage . This isnt talking about settling , or cracking .
In the event that the carpenter ant was the culprit that caused water damage to occur -LRB- by means of damagingdishwasher water lines , sprinklers , etc. -RRB- , not otherwise excluded , coverage would be provided for the damage caused as a result of the water . However , not to repair the appliance or system .
Most Homeowners Insurance policies will provide coverage for mostly anything short of nuclear disaster , flood or earth movement . Check with your insurance professional about the particulars of your policy and the specific exclusions it may have . Some policies provide limited coverage for mold or rot , for example . Damage caused by termites , carpenter ants or vermin are usually not covered .
Damage to a structure from termites , ants and insects in general is not covered under the standard homeowner insurance policy . The underlying theory is that such damage is the result of infestation due to negligence on the part of the homeowner as the proximate cause of the occurrence . The homeowner is obligated to inspect for such damage and remedy the situation accordingly . Homeowner insurance covers structural damage that is sudden and accidental in nature . Infestation does not fit these criteria . Check with a qualified -LRB- recommended -RRB- and fully licensed pest control operation in your area . You may be able to purchase a policy or bond that would cover you for certain types of infestation after they have inspected and possibly treated your residence structure . We are talking about structural damages here . There could be coverage for damages that might occur from a roof collapse , for example , resulting from the infestation , that causes loss to other property within the dwelling . However , the infestation damage itself is not covered .
The only instances that I am aware of claims being paid for paved driveways are when the damage is caused by a covered peril such as a tree falling and damaging it . I do n't think that rabbit tunnels and ant holes would be covered under any of the perils of a homeowner policy .
King Solomon had a keen insight into exactly what you are asking . In Proverbs 6:6 -8 we read , Go to the ant , you sluggard ; consider its ways and be wise ! It has no commander , no overseer or ruler , yet it stores its provisions in summer and gathers its food at harvest . Ants have done this for millennia . Of course they havent the benefit of the internet and financial pundits but they spend their days preparing for the days to come . In another place King Solomon spoke of those who would not leave the safety of their home for fear of what might happen . Again , that doesnt work either .
Damage by insects and vermin are excluded on ahomeownersinsurance policy . Of course this would include your ant problem not to mention termites and rodents . Damage that may have been caused by thesenuisanceshappen over a period of time and do not fall under the sudden and accidentaldefinition Time to call the exterminator .
This is a discount on your auto insurance that refers to your seat belt and air bags in your vehicle . There are many other discounts that carriers provide for your auto insurance rates . Some carriers provide discounts for alarm systems , ant-lock brakes , automatic traction control , and radar sensing systems -LRB- very new technology -RRB- just to name a few .
You can switch your auto insurance in the middle of a policy period . But unless your savings is enough to offset ant early cancellation penalty , you may want to wait for the renewal . To determine if it is wise to cancel early , a licensed and registered broker can help you determine the viability of changing and whether it makes prudent financial sense .
That is an excellent question !! Many people become confused by this type of annuity because of it 's connection to the stock market . The annuity does have it 's performance linked to the performance of the market , but it does not involve any particular stock . Your annuity gains based upon the gains that the aggregate market gains , not ant particular stock . For example , your annuity bases its gains on the S&P 500 . If the S&P 500 rises from point a to point b , your annuity credits your fund with a promised gain . You have not purchased any stock , nor are you participating in the market . You are just `` gambling '' on its performance . Since there is no stock investment , it is not considered a security , unlike a variable annuity , which does invest in the market , and therefore is considered a security . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
It depends upon the source of the water damage , the type of policy you have and whether the house is abandoned . To make this answer easier , lets assume that you have a Homeowners 3 policy and the house is either occupied or vacant -LRB- some furniture and presence -RRB- . Water damage from a burst pipe : typically your homeowners insurance will water damage from a burst pipe , however it will not cover the damaged pipe . You can get an endorsement to cover the damaged pipes . Water damage from rain/hail/wind : this will only be covered on a basic homeowners policy if the rain/hail caused the hole in the roof that lead to the water damage in your bathroom . Once again , you can get an endorsement to cover rain/hail/wind damage . Water damage from sewer backup or sump-pump failure : if the bathroom is in the basement and the water damage if from sewer backup or sump-pump failure you can only get coverage for this IF you have the appropriate endorsement - sewer and water backup . Please note that this is typically a sub-limit in your policy and goes towards both cleanup and replacement . I hope this helps .
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
To answer this question , I will assume that it is posed to determine if a homeowner policy will cover any type of damage to an air conditioner , absent any other facts . The homeowner policy is definitely not a maintenance policy and therefore will not pay for damage to the unit , unless it is damaged by the occurrence of some other type of covered peril . For example , if it is a relatively expensive ` window unit ' and a heavy picture falls off of the wall , striking and severely damaging the ac unit , there could be coverage , subject to the application of the homeowner policy deductible . In reality , you should think twice about the future premium increase ramifications of submitting a smallish claim of this nature . You would , in a situation of this nature , check with your agent to make sure it is worth submitting . If it is a central ac unit and is damaged by a fire in the garage caused by a carelessly laid cigar , there would be coverage , again subject to the deductible . The financial loss for a central ac unit would no doubt be much more extensive that for a window unit and might therefore merit claim submission . Also , the fire described would probably have damaged the walls , ceiling , possibly stored objects , etc. , and produced smoke damage to other parts of a house , if attached , justifying submission of a broader claim for damages , including those to the ac unit .
-- > Normal 0 All homeowners policies will cover your home and personal property should it be damaged but the type of damage you are covered for is defined in two general types of insuring agreements . One type -LRB- Named Peril -RRB- will tell you what specific types of damage you are covered for . The policies will actually name them ; fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , vandalism , etc. . For damage to be covered , you have to prove to the insurance company that the damage you sustained was caused by one of these named perils . The second type of insuring agreement -LRB- often referred to as all-risk -RRB- covers you for any direct damage unless the policy specifically excludes or limits it . Under this form of insurance , any damage is covered unless the insurance company can prove a specific exclusion or limitation applies . The burden of proof shifts from you proving you are covered under a Named Peril policy to the insurance company proving you are not covered under an All-Risk type policy . A small difference which means a lot should you have a claim . The term all-risk isnt used too much anymore ; this type of policy is often referred to as Special Form or Open Peril policies . Whatever you want to call them , this is the type of insuring agreement you should look for . Most of us are not prepared to prove anything to an insurance company . Its also much easier to understand what you are not covered for simply by reading the exclusions and limitations .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Long Term Disability Insurance Necessary ?
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
If you need your paycheck to pay your bills and maintain a desirable standard of living , disability insurance is probably necessary . If you became disabled and unable to work for more than several months , it could take a year to get on Social Security Disability , and the benefit amount is very low . In addition , if you can work at `` any '' job , you may not qualify for SSDI . By contrast , long term disability insurance can pay you more , the waiting period is usually only 3 months -LRB- whatever you specify in your policy -RRB- , and if you have the `` own occupation '' feature on your policy , you will collect the benefit even if you can work at `` any '' job , but just can not perform YOUR job . In light of those facts , most people would consider long term DI an necessary expense .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
If you need your paycheck to pay your bills and maintain a desirable standard of living , disability insurance is probably necessary . If you became disabled and unable to work for more than several months , it could take a year to get on Social Security Disability , and the benefit amount is very low . In addition , if you can work at `` any '' job , you may not qualify for SSDI . By contrast , long term disability insurance can pay you more , the waiting period is usually only 3 months -LRB- whatever you specify in your policy -RRB- , and if you have the `` own occupation '' feature on your policy , you will collect the benefit even if you can work at `` any '' job , but just can not perform YOUR job . In light of those facts , most people would consider long term DI an necessary expense .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
A supplemental disability insurance is a personally owned long term disability policy usually purchased to supplement a group employer sponsored long term disability plan . You are basically `` supplementing '' your existing group plan with a personally owned policy . The reason this is necessary is because most group plans only cover 50 - 60 % of an employees income . A supplemental policy will provide additional coverage in addition to the group plan . The amount of supplemental disability coverage you can purchase is limited based on the insurance carriers guidelines . This is determined by the amount of your income your group plan covers and weather or not you pay for your group plan or your company does . As a general rule , most carriers wo n't let you insure more than 70 % of your gross annual income .
Why is health insurance necessary ? Actually it 's not necessary , at least for another year . In 2014 changes will be coming . But as of today , health insurance is not necessary to have . You can self insure . The thing is if you self insure and have claims , you 're expected to pay them . So you would have to surrender assests to pay that bill . Insurance of ANY KIND is simply a form of liquid money to pay for things so that your other invested wealth can `` stay '' invested . So no insurance is never necessary , it just is a smart solution for some issues .
Long Term Disability Insurance is a necessary part of defensive planning . Most Americans have less than 90 days in cash reserves . During your earning years , you may experience a disability event lasting an average of 30 months . Social Security disability benefits can help as can employer sponsored short term disability insurance . But bottom line this is paycheck protection and a cornerstone product you should have in your insurance portfolio .
To be specific about what health insurance does not cover , you would have to check your plan 's policy 's exclusions & limitations . However , if you 're asking a general question , I think the key term here is `` medically necessary '' . If your provider bills a service as medically necessary , then it would generally be covered . From a common sense standpoint , why would an insurance company cover something that 's not medically necessary . A good example of something that 's not medically necessary is cosmetic surgery .
Persons who do not have a lot of assets to lose if they were to need long term care services may find that the cost of Long Term Care Insurance is not worth the sacrifice . On the other hand , those who have very large estates may feel that they are able to pay for their own Long Term Care if the need arises , and may not consider it necessary to purchase Long Term Care Insurance .
Under your current situation I would not carry the old disability policy . Disability insurance is a coordinated product in the sense that any number of policies will not pay more than the maximum scheduled amount usually no greater than 70 % The only reason to carry two different disability insurance policies is if you purchase a short term and a long term disability insurance policy . The long term policy may have an extended elimination period of 90 days or 180 days before benefits commence . A short term disability plan can commence within in days and pay benefits up to the elimination period of the long term plan . What you are describing sounds like two long term disability plan and would not make financial sense to keep the other policy .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Is A 401K A Retirement Plan ?
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a qualified defined contribution plan under ERISA , The Employment Retirement Income Act of 1974 . It allows for contributions pretax and some employers offer contribution matches . The accounts accumulates tax deferred and are taxed as ordinary income at distributions . Those distributions are included in the provisional income test for Social Security taxation .
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
That is a great question ! In the technical sense , yes , 401k 's are a retirement plan . They were not originally designed to be the primary retirement vehicle though . Originally , they were designed to compliment the pension , or company retirement plan that you would receive from your employer . As time has passed , less and less companies offer pension plans , and turned to 401k 's as a way to offer a retirement option while not having the risk of paying you after you retire . They contribute a certain amount , but the risk of losses is strictly yours . As a result , many folks have seen their retirement funds disappear when the market has fared poorly . A 401k can be a valuable part of your retirement plan , but should not be the entirety of it . Please contact me , if you would like more details , okay ? Thanks for asking !
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 591/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
How to set up a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- ? First before you decide on a 401k as your retirement plan , make sure it makes sense . Most people know the name 401k and sort of apply it as all retirement plans , but actually it 's one of many plans out there that an employer can use . The big thing I would suggest anyone look at before establishing a retirement plan is the cost of the plan itself . Typically a 401k will have fees for all people under the plan , participating or not . You will have discrimination tests to be run on the plan and contributions . Before you commit to a particular plan , check and see what the plan cost to operate . If your costs are greater than your returns , is it a good choice ?
A profit sharing plan falls under IRS section 401 . Both a profit sharing plan and 401k are forms of retirement plans that allow employees to make pre-tax contributions to an account where contributions and earnings are not taxed until they are pulled out during the distribution phase . It is important to note that a profit sharing plan does not have to be part of a retirement plan . A profit sharing plan typically allows the employer to decide from year-to-year whether to contribute on behalf of participants . It would make sense that this decision follows the company 's profitability for the previous year . While there are variations of both types of retirement plans , there are many similarities between profit sharing plans and 401k 's such as the ability to take out a loan or pull money out based on a narrow definition of hardship . Both can have non-elective employer contributions . An employer can offer both a profit sharing plan and a 401k . You might find this link to an IRS publication helpful regarding profit sharing plans . WEBSITELINK
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
Whole Life Insurance has many great aspects but using it as a retirement investment is not one of them . There are some companies that are promoting a concept of using your whole life insurance as your personal bank , instead of getting a loan from a bank to buy something use the cash value of your life insurance and then pay yourself back . But when it comes to retirement a whole life policy will not give you the gains needed to fund your retirement . When you look at your retirement saving , whether its your 401K that we are talking about or youre personal saving . Your financial planner should be telling you that you can only talk out about 5 % of the value per year otherwise you may run out of money . Think about that , if you have $ 100,000 in a 401k that will give you a yearly income of only $ 5,000 . If you are looking for options to protect yourself against premature loss and has additional income options for retirement then you should really look at index universal life . A 45yr old male non-smoker could invest $ 150 per month into a $ 100,000 life insurance policy and when he retires at 65 , he should be receiving about $ 6,000 of yearly income , most of which is tax free . This is a great option for most individuals , if you need more help or have additional questions please feel free to contact me .
That is a great question ! Simply put , a 401k rollover is what you call the action of taking the funds from one 401k and moving them -LRB- or `` rolling them over '' -RRB- into another 401k fund , or similar retirement vehicle . This has to be done in a very timely fashion , or there are tax consequences , and is most commonly done when you switch employers , and want to keep funding the 401k . Thanks for asking !
Being covered by a `` retirement plan '' means that perhaps your employer had a 401k plan and you contribute to the retirment plan and the employer can `` match '' a percentage = like 3 % . There used to be alot of companies that had a `` defined benefit plan '' . Your benefit under a `` defined benefit plan '' was caluculated each year by the actuarial firm administering the plan . This type of retirement plan is rare . If you contribute to an IRA each year when you file your tax returns the tax preparer calculates how much of your contribution is allowed to deducted on your tax returns based on current tax law . Being covered by a Retirement Plan means that within the definition of the tax code you have contributed to a plan that is recognized by the IRS as a `` retirement plan .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
That is a great question ! If you can afford to contribute to both your Roth IRA and your 401k , then by all means do so ! What a great way to provide for your retirement . You can contribute $ 5500 per year -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- to your Roth , and $ 17,500 in your 401k . Ideally , you contribute the max to your 401k , especially if your employer matches , and then fund your Roth , to ensure that you have some tax free income to balance the taxed income from the 401k . What a great question ! Thanks for asking !
That is a really good question ! And trust me , you 're not the only one asking it ... There are really very few certainties in life , but we all seek to find as many as possible . Knowing that we have a safely protected retirement certainly ranks up near the top . While we can not guarantee that our retirement fund will last , there are some things that you can do to help ensure it : 1 . -RRB- Have a clear picture of what retirement means to you - does it mean travelling and dining out often ? If so , your fund will need to be large enough to accommodate that . If it looks more like fishing and working part time , then perhaps your fund can be a little more modest , and still be fine . But if you do not know , `` People without vision perish , '' as the Proverb goes . 2 . -RRB- Pay close attention to how your 401k is performing . If you do n't know what it is doing , you are right to worry . While I do not recommend knee jerk reactions to losses , trends are worth paying attention to , especially if they are negative , precipitous , and lengthy . 3 . -RRB- Know your spending habits . Have a very good grip on your budget process , and where you can squeeze out a little more to invest . Having good habits and keeping debt low entering retirement helps with the life of your investment also . 4 . -RRB- Do not put all of your eggs in one basket , or as you more commonly hear , diversify . Start a Roth IRA to balance out your taxable 401k ; Purchase an annuity or two to ensure a steady income stream that will not run out . Purchase some property that you can earn an income from during retirement ; invest in bonds and low maintenance mutual funds . 5 . -RRB- Plan for the inevitable medical expenses that come with age . The Law allows for a dedicated retirement account used exclusively for health care to be non-taxable , if health issues are likely , start one . Look at a life insurance policy that includes living benefit provisions , or look into long term care protection . If your company offers an HSA , enroll , and start paying into it . 6 . -RRB- Save , save , save . Find high yield savings accounts , and be certain to have an emergency account . Having one allows you to be able to not have to make withdrawals from your retirement funds , or acquire more debt . Having one allows you to be able to make investments that otherwise would only be dreams . The best way to alleviate worry is to trust ; Faith in the One who provides for us , and being a good steward of what we 're given allows us to sleep at night . Hopefully there are ideas here that will help you . Please feel free to contact me if you would like a more personal analysis of where you sit . A great question , and one I 'm glad that you asked . Thanks !
As long as your company allows roll overs into their retirement plan , you can roll your 403b money into that 401k plan . One exception may be if you have previously comingled your 403b funds with another IRA . Your company 401k plan administrator should be able to answer your specific questions . You can also roll your 403b into a traditional IRA or Roth IRA . Here is a link to an IRS rollover chart which shows all the directions retirement money can move . WEBSITELINK
Yes , you can contribute to a 401k and IRA in the same year . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , it might be a good strategy to put in enough to qualify for the full employer match before contributing to an IRA . There are income qualifying rules for the traditional IRA . For married filing jointly or qualifying widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- is less than $ 181,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 181,000 and $ 191,000 your contribution amount is reduced . For single , head of household or married filing separately and you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year , if your MAGI is less that $ 114,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 114,000 and $ 129,000 your contribution amount is reduced . Traditional IRAs have a maximum age contribution limit of 70 and you must begin Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turned age 70 . Roth IRAs have no age limits for contribution and have no RMD at age 70 . This could mean you have two RMDs in the same year . If you or your spouse participates in an employer sponsored retirement plan such as a 401k , the ability to deduct a contribution to a traditional IRA hinges on what your MAGI is on your tax return along with your filing status . There are some rather complicated formulas that relate to this and you should definitely seek advice from your tax preparer on anything tax related . As always , you should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
Is a 401k considered a retirement plan ? Unfortunately , yes . Today 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s are considered to be retirement `` plans '' rather than retirement supplement plans that they were intended to be when enacted in the early 80 's . The orginal intent behind 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s was to provide employees with an addtional way to set wages aside for retirement . Somewhere along the way since they were introduced , they became `` primary '' retirement plans , shifting the risk of outcome from employer to employee .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Which Insurance Company Is The Cheapest For Auto ?
The cheapest auto policy is the one that pays your claim to maximum extent possible . That means that the policy is in force and has adequate limits . You can choose reduced coverage and suffer a great expense at the time of claim . You want to be restored and back on the road as quickly as possible . That is the definition of a cheap auto policy .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
I 'll share a common answer to a common question . It depends . Which company offers the cheapest auto insurance in Washington depends primarily on the insuredthe client . With all the variables companies use to get the final price , there is no way to tell what companies offers the cheapest rates for all clients all the time . In fact , most insurance companies do n't want to be the cheapest for every client . Most companies want to `` win '' accounts based on price 30-40 % of the time . With that information , it 's important to allow a trusted , licensed agent to shop multiple companies for you .
You can find the cheapest auto insurance at your agents office . The cheapest auto insurance is the policy with adequate limits that pays damages that result from an accident . Since this can involve personal injury and property damage , the amount can increase rapidly . Your agent will listen to you , offer sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . When you have a claim , you will be happy that you have the cheapest insurancethe one that pays !
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
As good life insurance policy is one that is in force the day that you die . I suppose you could speculate that the cheapest life insurance policy is one that was scheduled to reach the end of its term the day following your death . If you know when you are going to die , I can tell you which policy is cheapest . Since few of us know this the choice we generally make is which policy will give me all the coverage that I need during the time frames in which I need it . As for the name of the company , please understand that life insurance companies are highly regulated . Your state insurance commissioners job is to make sure that the death claim is paid when it is owed . Money from a B - insurance company is just as negotiable as an A + company .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
If you go to a website that offers free , instant life insurance quotes from multiple companies , you can enter some factors -LRB- date of birth , gender , term length , face amount , etc -RRB- and see which life insurance companies have the lowest quotes . If there were no questions about build or health , you are most likely viewing quotes for the best rate class , which may not be the class you qualify for . But that exercise does give you an idea of which companies offer the cheapest rates for term insurance for those in perfect health . Keep in mind that being overweight , having a health condition , or being older will probably result in other companies offering the cheapest rates . To find the lowest priced term life insurance rates for you , it is best to call an agent so that they can gather all these variables and do the shopping for you .
That is going to depend on the same factors that make up your rate for your auto insurance coverage . Each company is going to rate each driver differently based on the amount of risk that the company can bear with in a certain risk class . Always remember cheapest is not always best . If one company was the cheapest and the best there would only be one company out there .
Yes the internet is flooded with thousands of insurance companies , insurance brokers , agents offering auto insurance rates online . It just takes a few minutes and few clicks on the mouse . The best thing about getting auto insurance is the competition among the carriers . Because of such competition , many of them offer the cheapest auto insurance rates for you . Shopping for the best auto insurance rates on the internet allows you the option whether or not to talk to an agent as well . Make sure when online have your old policy ready so you can refer to it for some of the questions you will have to answer . When buying a policy online or offline make sure you fully disclose your driving record . In some States while youre at it , check your credit score . Some auto insurance companies will not run your driving record at the time of purchase but they will run it on the back end and once they find out about your driving history and your credit , your rates will increase . So do the research before you buy .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
The cheapest renter 's policy is the one that pays the full amount of a claim and leaves you paying nothing more than the deductible . Everything else costs too much ! You probably wanted to know what company or type of company is cheapest but that is not really a bargain . Having enough coverage with a company that will pay the claim is the cheapest way you can go .
Geico is often the cheapest auto insurance company available in your area . But not every time . There are many reputable , reliable and highly-rated carriers that offer very low rates in a given area . It may be Esurance , Allstate , Liberty Mutual or other companies that save you the most money . An experienced broker will help you -LRB- at no cost -RRB- find the cheapest rates and show you the most appropriate coverage you should have .
The cheapest auto policy is the one that completely pays a claim . That company will make you whole when you have a loss . No matter how much or how little you pay , that company is the cheapest , and it just happens to be the best because it pays your claim . We want to evaluate insurance by its price but the real test is the way it pays your specific claim .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Arson ?
Fire is a covered peril in every homeowners policy . This is the most basic coverage available . If the fire is accidentally caused by the tenant it is covered . If the owner purposely burns down their insured property they are committing a crime . Even under those circumstances coverage might be extended to another insured .
Arson is a covered claim to a homeowner 's insurance policy . Your coverage will include damage to the home , other structures , the personal property -LRB- usually at replacement cost -RRB- , additional living expenses and other specific benefits along with scheduled property . I am assuming , of course , that the the policyholder was not involved in the act of arson .
In the all-risk form of a renter 's policy , which is the most common form , arson would be a covered cause of loss . All perils are covered except those specifically excluded and arson does n't appear on the list . The coverage would cover the personal property of the insured . If you have such a policy take photos of all your property .
Arson is a covered claim to a homeowner 's insurance policy . Your coverage will include damage to the home , other structures , the personal property -LRB- usually at replacement cost -RRB- , additional living expenses and other specific benefits along with scheduled property . I am assuming , of course , that the the policyholder was not involved in the act of arson .
If your brother-in-law was a listed insured on the policy , I am afraid you have a very difficult road ahead . You can not burn down your own building and expect the insurance company to honor the claim . As with anything this complex , you might want legal assistance . While arson is covered , self-inflicted arson is not .
If your home is burned , your need to file a claim . Most companies provide a toll free number . If you suspect arson you must notify the police . You must provide police and company with any relevant witnesses . You must then cooperate with your insurance company . The company will arrange temporary living conditions if your property can not be used . You must make sure that your house is secured against further loss . You must provide the insurance company with a list of items which were lost , normally within 60 days . The company has the right to get plans and specifications from you and other details concerning the loss . Photographs of the building and contents become invaluable under these circumstances . The adjuster will then work with contractors to repair the damage to the residence and will make an estimate of the actual cash value of the personal property . There objectives will be to get you back into your home as quickly as possible .
In California insurance company underwriters do not take your credit score into consideration when approving a homeowners policy . If there was a claim in the past that appeared to have been arson , they might take a closer look . Incidentally , auto insurers in California do not pull your credit score either .
You need to speak with an attorney in your area . I have seen similar situation where the innocent party is able to recover from the loss . It is similar to the fact that if there was a mortgage on the property and they were an additional named insured , they would have recourse even if the cause of loss was arson from the homeowner . This is a complex issue and I would expect that it is a large loss , therefore I do highly recommend you speak with a qualified attorney that practices in this field .
Not if the insured or resident of the household is involved in the arson . If the previous is not the case then typically you would be covered . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
Home Insurance may cover appliances in home ; there are 2 types of appliances , those that are fitted and those that are free standing . Fitted appliances constitute part of the Dwelling Coverage on the home insurance policy , whereas , free standing appliances may be covered under the Personal Property Coverage on the home insurance policy . The perils covered under a home insurance policy must be reviewed regarding the damage to the appliances . For example , Fire , Smoke , Lightning & Water damage may be covered on the policy which would also carry forward to the appliances . Regarding free standing appliances , the policy must afford coverage for Personal Property . If this question was intended for the reason of upkeep and maintenance of appliances , home insurance policies are not intended to repair or replace appliances due to maintenance and/or breakdown . Home insurance is intended for sudden and accidental losses which could cause financial hardship to the homeowner . If you wish to cover your appliances , you may wish topurchase a Home Warranty Contract from a small handful of carriers who offer a maintenance contract ; in this case , you will pay an annual premium as well as a Service Charge for each call when a repair company is dispatched to take care of a covered maintenance situation . If your question was indeed regarding perils covered on a homeowners policy , you may wish to contact your local agent and review the coverage on your policy or WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your coverage for you at no charge .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Homeowners Insurance and Title Insurance are not the same . Title insurance is insurance to make sure the title of the home is clean . For example you are purchasing a home from Mr. Doe . The title company is to make sure all information is accurate such as who is the seller , boundaries are correct and so on . If you purchased the home from Mr. Doe and you find out later there also was a MS. Doe who says I never gave permission to sell the home now there is a problem and title insurance would step in to cover this situation . Homeowners insurance is what you purchase to cover your actual dwelling and property , liability etc. . . for a potential loss .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
All homeowners policies cover claims that result in the damage or destruction of covered property do to accidents . Your home policy does cover the damage to your home and personal property due to your furnace . But remember , the claim will not cover the repair or replacement of the furnace itself . Home insurance is not a repair and maintenance insurance . It only covers damage to your property as the result of an accident and will not cover the replacement or repair of items in your home . If you have any other questions about this subject please feel free to call me .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How To Shop For Cheap Car Insurance ?
`` Cheap auto insurance '' can mean acceptance of low liability limits , to keep the price down . The possible repercussions need to be considered seriously in any State . Think about the exposure you have when you drive , especially if and when you have an accident that is your fault . For example , you -LRB- or a family member -RRB- could have an at-fault accident that damages a very expensive vehicle or vehicles and also causes an injury to the other driver and maybe one or more of the passengers . If you have purchased low -LRB- cheap ? -RRB- limits of liability and you are sued , you could be facing the loss of personal assets , if a sizable judgement is assessed against you . Talk to several agents about this .
Cheap car insurance for young drivers is available ... If you know where to look ! Many reputable insurers offer low down-payments and cheap rates . Shopping for these best offers is best handled by an experienced auto insurance broker with preferably 20 years -LRB- or more -RRB- experience . Not only do we help our clients find the best deals , but our websites offer free information and advice that can often help reduce premiums . There are no fees or charges and taking care of clients is the top priority . Brokers do n't charge fees and we do the shopping so our customers save . That 's not a bad deal ! Try us and let us find cheap auto insurance prices for teenagers !
There are many carriers out there all can be quite `` Cheap '' But be careful when shopping for rates cheap does n't always mean you have the proper coverage . Also depends on what type of coverage you are looking for . When shopping online there are times that the rate is fantastic then you find out that they are not even allowed to sell insurance in your state . you also have to think about in the event of a claim can they be reached and you talk to someone local ? Buyer beware make you are covered properly like the old saying goes if it is to good to be true then most likely that is the case . However I do have some carries that I have a client in that has full coverage on a car and only $ 143 for 6 months of coverage with low deductible now that is cheap but her coverage is not . So the key is making sure you know what you are purchasing before you put the money out . A Local agent or the States insurance commissioners office can assist you in finding what you are looking for
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
Regardless of whether or not a life insurance agency advertises cheap life insurance , the reality is that all life insurance companies must charge you the same price , no matter where you purchased the policy from . However , there are some factors that enter into whether you will find a cheaper policy at one agency over another . Some of these agencies ' methods are positive , and some are negative . Here are some examples of both . Positive 1 -RRB- The insurance agency takes all your health details and shops among multiple carriers to find the one that will issue your policy at the cheapest price . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency will sell you a policy that suits your need , not pressuring you to buy a more expensive policy just because it makes them more money . 3 -RRB- The insurance agent will go to bat for you if you are rated unfairly , and strive to help you resolve that , or find you another policy , if possible . Negative 1 -RRB- The insurance agency offers you a short term policy , or accidental death policy , just to make the sale . They do this whether or not that type of policy best suits your need . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency neglects to ask pertinent health details and then offers you a cheap policy . Or else they ask health details but still claim to be able to get you impossibly low rates , often out of ignorance . Ironically , to get the cheapest life insurance , you need a life insurance agent who is `` valuable '' . Go to someone you trust to listen to you , who will shop your case among multiple carriers to find your best price , and who will not sell you something worthless just to save off a few dollars and make the sale . That way you will have a policy of value at the most affordable price .
Cheap homeowners insurance rates are found by shopping . Then shopping some more . And then shopping a little bit more . That 's not fun so here 's the best solution : An experienced broker can save you time , money and a lot of frustration . Contact an agent/broker in your area that represents multiple carriers and they will compare the lowest rates available and find you the best offer .
That 's a great question ! I 'd like to give you a bit of advice - some things are good to buy `` cheap , '' other things in the long run are better to spend a little more money on . Cheap shoes will hurt your feet , and wear out quickly . Buying a very cheap car often means spending a lot on constant repairs . Insurance is one of those things , especially for a young driver , that it is better to not go `` cheap '' on . You want better coverage , as you are much more likely to have an accident than an experienced driver would be . You will want a lower deductible , as you will inevitably end up needing repairs at some point . Please look for a local agent who can help you , or feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to give you some pointers . Thanks for asking !
Cheap car insurance rates for an 18-year old -LRB- and other teenagers -RRB- can only be found by shopping the right way . There are dozens of carrier that offer coverage , and for a young driver , prices could vary by as much as 80 % . An experienced -LRB- preferably 20 years in the business -RRB- broker -LRB- and our websites -RRB- guide you through the shopping process by helping select the companies with the best offers . And yes , if your grades are good , you 'll save money !
That is a great question ! There is a reason why things are cheap . You buy a cheap car , you spend a lot on repairs . You buy cheap clothes , they rip or shrink . Term insurance is cheap because it has very few perks , like a whole life policy would . Your term policy will have no cash value , and will end at a specific time . Because there is no management of your cash involved , and the odds are great that the company will collect from you for years and not have to pay you anything , those policies can be sold very cheaply . About the only way that you can stack the odds back in your favor and get money out of your policy would be to get a `` return of premium '' policy or rider . For a larger premium payment , this allows you to receive back most of what you had paid into the policy . If you have questions , feel free to drop me a line , okay ? Thanks for asking !
You can get cheap car insurance by shopping and comparing with an experienced broker . There are dozens of reputable and reliable insurers in your area , so it is very difficult to find the best pricing without taking a week off from your daily activities ! For example , as an experienced broker -LRB- more than 32 years -RRB- , we are committed to our customers and finding the best rates from top-rated carriers . When you hear `` shop till you drop , '' you can apply that work ethic to an experienced broker/agent when they go to work for you . Since a broker understands underwriting guidelines of multiple companies , your specific information will help determine the carrier that gives you the best deal and the broadest range of discounts .
Car insurance rates on a 19 year-old will vary , depending on where you live , your driving record , the type of car you own and your coverage . It could be quite cheap or fairly expensive , if there are multiple violations . As an experienced broker , our job is to shop all of the top companies for customers and utilize our websites to research and compare the best choices .
The cheapest insurance company for you depends on where you live , the type of car you drive and your driving record . You should call a local broker or visit a few insurance websites and get some quotes . An insurance company that is cheap in one part of the country can be really expensive in another part . For example , I 've heard that Progressive car insurance is inexpensive in many states , but I know in California it 's a lot . When you start shopping around , make sure you ask for all the discounts you might be entitles to . -LRB- low mileage , home/auto policy , occupational , good student , defensive driving course , etc. -RRB-
Need cheap car insurance at age 17 ? One of the most important things to do is to shop and compare different rates from multiple carriers . Prices can vary by as much as 50 % , depending on the insurer that you are using . Utilize all discounts , including good student , multi-policy and any other offered reductions . A broker will handle all of this for you at no cost . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated auto insurance websites .
By cheap I assume that you are referring to the premium . The cheap I like to think of is the cost when you have the claim and your company stands behind you and pays everything that you expected . Regardless of the premium , you will then know what cheap really means . A major property loss could take 100 years of premiums to pay for . Having correct coverage is the way to have the truly cheap homeowners policy , find an agent , one you can trust .
The best place to go for cheap car insurance is a resource that shops all major companies ... not just a few local and national carriers . Since claim payouts do not substantially vary -LRB- in most situations -RRB- , it 's important to have quality coverage at the lowest cost . An experienced and unbiased broker will save you time and money . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the best auto insurance prices for consumers .
Good question but think about it we need to ask ourselves a few questions before we go cheap sometimes cheap is good we all need to be good stewards of our money so the questions we should ask if answered honestly will be an indicator . Do I eat good healthy food ? Do I drink alcohol ? Do I work out at least 20 minutes 2 times a week ? How is my spiritual life ? Then we can decide which policy fits my need it can be fairly cheap but you must answer the questions and have a good consultant that cares about you not the money the money will come when we serve the people .
Well sometimes there can be certain people that will need a term policy because of where they have focused their budget in the past , over all it does n't fit every persons goals but will be cheaper . I will use my story to answer the question when I purchased my policy I realized that it would take some focus on my part even working with a very knowledgeable agent I already knew just like most families we wait until about 45 -55 years of age to purchase what we should have purchased in our 20 's in the first place and then we start shopping to find out wow this is not cheap but it is now or never . So $ 300 a month was not cheap for me but I knew it 's now or never so I made a commitment to my family it 's now I want leave them with this burden it 's just a decision just like the one that caused you to make the decision to wait . now where did that come from procrastination and that can be inherited by your children so I would say change your focus change your life .
There are many cheap auto insurance companies throughout the US . -LRB- That is ... carriers that charge low rates -RRB- How cheap will your rate be ? It depends where you live and other underwriting factors that could impact the price . For example , while Progressive , Esurance , Geico and Erie may offer low rates in Ohio , in Pennsylvania or New Jersey , a completely different set of companies may be the best option . As experienced brokers , along with our top-rated websites , we search , find and compare the absolute lowest car insurance rates in all ares . That 's our job and a big reason why customers prefer to work with brokers .
How do you define cheap ? In 2014 the average monthly cost for a Silver level ObamaCare compliant major medical plan was $ 328 . By that standard any coverage costing less than that would be `` cheap '' . People who qualify for little or no subsidy of their individual health insurance -LRB- shame on you for making more than $ 42,000 annually -RRB- may argue that $ 328 or more per month for health insurance is n't affordable much less cheap . But the folks in Washington , D.C. know better about these things than you do . Some people who are healthy and are low consumers of health care services have turned to Short Term Medical plans as a more affordable option for health insurance coverage . And , indeed this may work out well for some people as Short Term Medical policies are generally cheaper than individual major medical policies . However , before pursuing this strategy you do need to be aware that Short Term Medical plans do n't cover pre-existing conditions , usually do n't cover preventive care , may not cover prescription drugs and may have other limitations . Also , they do not meet the criteria under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual coverage mandate and therefore can leave you vulnerable to a tax penalty for noncompliance . You should seek out an experienced health insurance agent to discuss your needs and options and to fully understand whatever health insurance product it is that you purchase .
Cheap car insurance can be as little as $ 20 or $ 30 per month , depending on where you live , the type of car you drive , your age , and of course , the liability limits you have . Some carriers offer discounts that can total as much as 50 % . It is , however , important to understand that state minimum liability limits may leave you underinsured . Although low liability limits result in very cheap pricing , it 's important that we , as experienced unbiased brokers , advise you which coverages may be the most appropriate . To find the lowest rates , always utilize an experienced broker . Not only do we offer unbiased advice and top-notch websites , but you can also save time and money by quickly finding the best prices . The quoting process typically takes only a few minutes and you 'll be able to view the best options in your area .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Exempt From Creditors ?
If the creditor is going after money owed by the insured person who passed away , the life insurance is exempt from creditors if the beneficiary of the policy was a person . Creditors can not take the life insurance proceeds from a beneficiary unless the beneficiary co-signed the debt with the insured person , or has debts of their own for which creditors are seeking payment .
Life insurance must be distributed to a beneficiary and not the estate to remain exempt from the deceaseds creditors . The beneficiaries creditors would be able to go after the life insurance proceeds . Most retirement accounts and cash value within a life insurance policy are exempt from creditors and can be retained , even through bankruptcy . One way creditors sometimes get to the funds is if life insurance proceeds are deposited into what was a joint checking account that the creditor had access to . While a person may be able to have the funds returned through legal proceedings , it is often best to close the joint account and open a new account .
There are assets protected from creditors by federal and/or state statute . Those assets are considered essential for the debtor to maintain at least a financial well-being . Creditor protection is balanced by the concerns for creditor 's rights to access the debtor 's assets . Annuities can be argued as a legitimate retirement plan like IRAs . Some states exempt annuities from the claims of creditors . Each state has differing views and regulations on the claims of creditors . Seek out legal counsel to determine what assets are protected from claims of creditors .
If the creditor is going after money owed by the insured person who passed away , the life insurance is exempt from creditors if the beneficiary of the policy was a person . Creditors can not take the life insurance proceeds from a beneficiary unless the beneficiary co-signed the debt with the insured person , or has debts of their own for which creditors are seeking payment .
Generally , the death benefit of life insurance in Mississippi is exempt from creditors as long as it it not left to the estate . If the beneficiary is the estate , or if there are no living beneficiaries on the policy -LRB- causing the death benefit to go to the estate -RRB- , the life insurance proceeds will go through probate and creditors will not be exempt from going after those funds . Contact a lawyer about possible exceptions .
While it appears simple on its face , the life insurance exemption from creditor claims can be very confusing . It is the opinion of some attorneys who specialize in life insurance law that the only way to truly protect life insurance proceeds from creditors of the insured is to have the policy owned by an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . Similarly , the only way to protect the proceeds form the creditors of the beneficiary is to have the proceeds paid into a discretionary spendthrift trust instead of directly to the beneficiary . Obviously these are issues that should be discussed with a qualified estate planning attorney . If you do n't know one , chances are that your life insurance agent will be able to refer you to one . This type of advanced planning may not be justified in ordinary circumstances . However if there is a good possibility that there could be claims by creditors of either the insured or the beneficiary , then the use of appropriate trusts should be considered .
Life insurance that is left to a person as beneficiary is usually exempt from creditors in South Carolina . If the beneficiary has co-signed for an unpaid debt at the time the Insured dies , then the creditors may be able to go after the insurance proceeds . And if the beneficiary is the Insured 's estate , creditors will try to collect their due from the insurance proceeds in the estate . But a person who receives a life insurance death benefit is not liable for the debts of the Insured .
Life insurance is exempt from creditors in Minnesota if the life insurance is left to a beneficiary other than the estate . If the life insurance goes to the estate -LRB- either on purpose or by default because all the named beneficiaries are dead -RRB- , the money will go through probate , where creditors can collect on it . If the life insurance is left to a person , creditors can not take it -LRB- unless perhaps the beneficiary was a co-signer to the Insured 's debts -RRB- .
Every state has differing rules on creditors . Most exempt life insurance death benefit proceeds from the claims of creditors . Creditors generally do not hold a position before the beneficiaries of a life insurance policy on benefits paid out . The policy beneficiaries receiving proceeds just before filing chapter seven and six months after may be ruled as property of the bankruptcy estate . Consult your bankruptcy attorney before relying on any information in this post .
Generally speaking , life insurance is exempt from creditors in Utah if the beneficiary is a person . If the beneficiary is the estate , then creditors can try to collect on the unpaid debt owed them from the life insurance proceeds . But they can not take the life insurance benefit from an individual who received it as a beneficiary , unless that person co-signed the debt .
Life insurance proceeds that are left to a beneficiary are exempt from creditors in Kentucky , as long as the beneficiary is not a co-signer to the insured person 's debt . If the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is the estate , creditors can go after life insurance proceeds upon the insured person 's death .
Whether life insurance cash value is protected from creditors depends on what state the policyholder resides in . In the state of our home office -LRB- Arizona -RRB- , 100 % of the cash value of life insurance is protected from creditors when the policy has been in existence over two years and the beneficiary is a family dependent . In my home state of Nebraska , only $ 100,000 of the cash value is exempt .
Life insurance is exempt from creditor in Connecticut if the beneficiary on the policy is not the estate . If the insured person passes away with debt , and the proceeds of his/her policy goes to the estate -LRB- either because the policy was set up that way , or because the beneficiaries are no longer living -RRB- , then the life insurance money will go through probate , where creditors can go after it . If the beneficiary is a person , they can not take it away from that person .
In Canada , variable annuities are referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . They are similar to mutual funds , but there are differences . Which one is better depends on your objectives . Both offer diversified investment opportunities to build wealth . In addition , segregated fund policies provide important wealth protection , business and estate planning solutions . The key differences : Guarantees on your principal - The money you invest in a seg fund is guaranteed up to 100 % upon death or maturity . Locking-in market gains - Some seg funds allow you to lock in market gains -LRB- `` resets '' -RRB- that can increase the amount payable at death or maturity . Bypass probate - Seg fund death benefit proceeds are paid directly to a named beneficiary instead of your estate . This bypasses probate , a public process that can be both costly and lengthy . Creditor protection - By designating a qualified beneficiary on your seg fund policy , your investments maybe exempt from seizure by creditors in the event of unforeseen bankruptcy or legal proceedings . Segregated funds are well suited to : Business owners looking for creditor protection succession planning or emergency fund solution . Pre-retirees looking for wealth accumulation but want to limit potential losses with maturity and death guarantees . Pre-retirees and retirees looking to preserve their legacy and transfer their estate in the most private , timely and cost-effective way . If you have further questions . or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is addition information available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca
In the state of Utah death benefit proceeds are exempt from creditors as long as the proceeds are paid to either the spouse or a child of the insured and the policy was in force for more than one year . Cash surrender values are protected from both bankruptcies and non-bankruptcies with the exception of monies placed into the contract one year prior to the creditor claim .
Most states allow a portion of Annuity funds to be exempt from creditors . For most states this amount is in the $ 250k - $ 300k range , however it does vary so check with your states Department of insurance , or with a local Attorney . Also , all Annuities have a Beneficiary designation in the event of death . This Beneficiary receives the Annuity funds free of probate . Which means that the deceased 's creditors can not touch them .
A debtor can collect on the proceeds of a life insurance policy if that party is the beneficiary of a policy . It can depend on what state you reside in as to whether your life insurance proceeds can be exempt , if you are beneficiary because of statues you should not have any problems . The Creditor would have to know also that the policy existed to be able to pursue the debt in this manner . There are state and federal statues regarding creditors rights in insurance . Insurance was developed to protect against contingencies that might financially interfere with the proceeds that were set up for someones loved ones .
Only minimal protection exists for annuity contracts under federal bankruptcy laws . Beyond that , the answer will vary by State . Usually annuities have some heightened protection level due to being considered essential for the debtor 's family to maintain a minimum level of well-being and avoid becoming a burden to the State . If an annuity is an IRA , Roth IRA or similar retirement vehicle , it can receive even more protection . Here 's a list of states that offer 100 % exemption of cash values from variable annuities for creditor claims : Arizona , Florida , Hawaii , Maryland , Michigan , New Mexico , Oklahoma and Texas . Kansas offers 100 % exemption after holding the product for one year and Louisiana after nine months . As always , consult a legal representative to see your specific rights in your state .
In many states , Annuities are exempt from creditors up to a certain dollar limit . But this varies from state to state . It can also be very situation specific . It is best to consult with a lawyer who is familiar with CAs estate laws . Especially if this is a main concern when making the purchase .
Yes , No and Maybe . Now , are we all clear on that ? The simple version of things is that failure to comply with the individual mandate will trigger a penalty for an adult of $ 95 or 1 % of Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- . And , if the average citizen knows anything at all about ObamaCare then this is probably the piece they know about . As with so many aspects of ObamaCare , when one gets down into the details the picture gets less clear . First , there were certain groups excluded from ObamaCare and the individual mandate from the law 's very beginning -LRB- members of certain faiths such as the Amish , people enrolled in health care sharing ministries and Native Americans are prominent examples -RRB- . You are also exempted from the individual mandate penalty if the lowest cost marketplace option in your area is more than 8 % of your family income or you fall below the tax filing threshold . As the law has continued to `` evolve '' there has been a new class of exemptions granted by the IRS for `` hardship '' exemptions . This IRS form provides 14 different hardship exemptions a taxpayer can claim to avoid paying the individual mandate penalty . Some are rather narrowly constructed and have an obvious logic to them , the exemption for being homeless for example . Others , are worded in ways that can leave a lot of room for creativity . Some of my favorite hardship exemptions are ; 1 -RRB- You received a shut off notice from your utility company . -LRB- So , do n't pay your gas bill for a couple of months , get a shutoff notice then pay your bill , and you qualify for a health penalty waiver - can anybody foresee lots of people having `` cash flow '' problems on their utility bills in the years to come ? -RRB- 2 -RRB- You experienced the death of a close family member . -LRB- Yep , that 's it . Does n't really define the time line , what `` experienced '' truly means , what does `` close '' mean and how far out on the family tree can you go and still say someone was a family member . The potential for creativity in this area is hilarious to anticipate . -RRB- 4 -RRB- Your individual plan is cancelled and you believe other marketplace plans are unaffordable . -LRB- When it comes to belief , do any of us really believe that health insurance is affordable ? What is my belief predicated on ? Will my belief be viewed differently if I am a Tea Party donor or a supporter of the Occupy movement ? -RRB- 5 -RRB- You experienced another hardship in obtaining health insurance . -LRB- I agree that brevity is the soul of wit but this may take things to the extreme . What 's a hardship to one person is an inconvenience to another . Dust off your creative writing skills , I can foresee lots of tales of woe about losing your dog of 15 years -LRB- hey , the dog meant more to me than some close relatives -RRB- , that you only have dial-up internet , why the mind runs wild with the possibilities ! So , will you be penalized on your 2014 taxes in 2015 if you do n't have acceptable health insurance . Technically , yes . In practical terms , many people will be able to claim an exemption and that will significantly dilute the anticipated revenue stream -LRB- and the government has already included individual mandate tax penalties in its cost projections for ObamaCare -RRB- from and the practical effect of the individual mandate on people 's behavior . In many ways you will have to be almost actively seeking out the opportunity to pay the tax penalty or be in that place in life where you are getting by financially without a health insurance payment and not much of anything that could smack of a hardship occurs in your life . For a lot of other people , some life circumstances during many years of their lives will let them take a pass on the penalty . You can bet the tax preparation services are going to be going great guns on this , they 've already started trying to help people enroll . It 's only logical to extend that to making sure every hardship their client is entitled to is reported .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is The Best Medicare Option ?
Medicare Part A is automatic once you turn age 65 . Medicare Part B is also an automatic enrollment unless you opt out or choose to delay your coverage . Beyond that your choice is to keep traditional Medicare -LRB- Part A and Part B -RRB- and purchase a Medicare supplement plan , or enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan . Advantage plans are a form of privatized Medicare that is managed by insurance carriers .
It depends on your area and individual circumstances . There is no one best plan . A good agent will analyze your needs and circumstances and help you choose the plan that works best for you and your goals . Medicare Advantage Plans differ according to area / Medicare Supplements , while the plans offer the same coverage company to company , there is a whole alphabet of options . Plan F will offer the most comprehensive coverage , but it is also the most expensive . If you do not mind paying a little out of pocket , thee is a high deductible Plan F that is very affordable . Do n't let the term High Deductible concern you . Medicare pays their 80 % until your deductible is paid , so its not a bad deal . Plan N is another option if you do not mind doctors copay 's . Sit down with a good experienced agent who specializes in both Medicare Supplements and Medicare Advantage and go over your options .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
ABN stays for Advanced Benificiary Notice of Noncoverage . A doctor or Medcare provide may give you an ABN if they believe Medicare may not pay for the service you require . The ABN lists the services and items that Medicare isn ; ' t expected to pay for , an estimate of their cost and what Medicare may not pay for them . There are 3 options for you to choose from on the ABN form . 1 . You want the item or service , the provider may ask you to pay for them but you want a claim submitted to Medicare . The claim may be denied , you may be responsible to pay the provider but you can file an appeal to Medicare . Option 2 : You want the items or service but you do not want the provider to make a claim to Medicare . You may be asked to pay for the items or serivce now . Since the provider did not file a cliam to Medicare you can not file an appeal . Option 3 : You do not want the item or servce trhat may not be paid for by Medicare .
The word `` best '' is so subjective . Best what ? Best rates ? Best underwriting ? Best customer service ? Best claims payment history ? When you look at Insurance , compare it to purchasing an automobile . You have Mercedes , BMW , Toyota , Ford , Chrysler , Volvo . Which car is best ? Thats hard to say . Each of these makers produce cars that will start and take you to your destination . They can come with a lot of the things that make our car ride enjoyable . But what do you want ? Comfort ? Style ? Good gas mileage ? Ability to be driven for years ? High mileage capability ? It all depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay to get it . Insurance is the same way . Talk to an agent and clearly define what you want . Then look for companies that offer that product . Then you can compare prices , look into how they handle claims , customer service , etc. . Finally , realize that most Insurance companies -LRB- due to heavy regulations -RRB- have to meet certain standards to remain an Insurance company . That being said you can usually find a good fit for your circumstances if you do your research .
The short answer is that it depends on what you are looking for . Most Medicare Advantage plans have either $ 0 premium or very little premium per month . Everyone likes free or is it really free ? One of the biggest things to look for in a Medicare Advantage plan is the `` max out of pocket cost '' which can be as high as $ 6,700 per year . There is also a network so you would need to make sure you see doctors within that network . The benefits on the plan can change from year to year as well as the network itself . The best thing to do is to compare a Medicare Advantage plan and a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap plan -RRB- to determine what is best for you . A Medicare Supplement plan will have a monthly premium , however , the `` max out of pocket costs '' can be zero or close to it . There is also no network and the benefits ca n't change with a Medicare Supplement plan . A lot of people who have a Medicare Supplement plan like the idea of being able to budget monthly for the expense and not have to worry about a big medical bill coming unexpectedly . Contact an independent agent that specializes in Medicare plans and they will be able to review all your options with you .
All insurance auto policies are the same they all have liability which is damage to other . Then you have optional coverage of un insured and under insured and medical pay then of course the option of `` Full '' coverage which really is not the best choice of words for coverage but that is coverage that repairs your auto in the even of a loss minus the deductible . The best coverage would be to have higher limits and full coverage . How ever you budget needs to thought about also . If you are purchasing all the coverage and ca n't afford the higher deductible then full coverage may not be the best option for you . Before you ever purchase a car or insurance shop around call a local agent and discuss what options you have . Many agencies demand that you have certain limits which is recommended to have the higher limits but it is pointless if you ca n't afford the higher limits because if it means eating or insurance well you going to choose food . Talk to an agent who will listen to your concerns and find you the most affordable rate and coverage that your desire . Online quotes can sometime be lower but the service sometimes is not as well as an agent example at our agency you can reach us 24/7 we never want you to ever have to call a 800 number and talk to a stranger .
You do not need and it is actually unethical and against Medicare guidelines to sell you a Medicare Supplement with a Medicare Advantage Plan . There are some policies that will help pay some of the out of pocket costs of a Medicare Advantage and in some cases they may be a good option . These are not Medicare Supplements . If however the premium gets too high you are better off in a Medicare Supplement plan rather than a Medicare Advantage rather than pay a premium for the supplemental hospital coverage , Make sure you have a good agent who can help you decide your best options based on your individual situation .
You should consult an insurance agent who is licensed in your state to discuss options that exist for medicare options . You can also contact the Social Security Administration for some guidance on what options exist . Lastly , you could also seek out the advice of a fee based financial adviser who , for some cost , can advise you on medicare options that exist to you .
There is no one critical illness carrier or product that is the best option for all situations and all people . Because of the variations in products and the variations in needs , we can not declare one the best for everyone . You 'd be best suited to seek out the advice of an agent who is licensed in your state to discuss what options are available and determine which critical illness product is best for you .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy is the one that is going to do what you want it to for what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Pay for any damage to your home ? The Best policy would guaranty your home would be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by any cause . All policies will have exclusions or limitations . The Best policy will have the fewest exclusions or limitations . Reimburse you for loss or damage to your personal property ? The Best policy will repair or replace -LRB- new for old -RRB- your property should it be damaged from any cause . Again , most policies will have exclusions and limitations , the Best policy will have the fewest exclusions and limitations . The Best policy will include a Personal Liability limit not less than $ 300,000 and offer a good Personal Umbrella should you need or want higher limits . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur and help you return to your pre-loss position . In my opinion , the Best policy will be the one that will do all the above for the most favorable premium .
I am sorry to hear about your financial difficulties . Before surrendering your Whole Life Policy please consider that you will no longer have coverage and if you were to apply in the future the cost will be more than what you are locked into now . That said , you may have some options available to you . First , have you considered just withdrawing or taking a loan from the cash value ? This way the policy will still be in force . Be sure to understand what the surrender value is as well on the policy . It may mean you will get less out of the policy than what you were thinking . Please consider what will happen if death was to occur in the next 5 years , 10 years , etc. and what financial situation this may put you in . I would recommend contacting your Broker/agent to discuss your options . If you do not have one , I would be more than happy to look over what you have and make any recommendations based on what your needs are and what is available from the policy . This is a free service . Feel free to contact me at : mattb@denverwestip.info or call me at -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498 .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
There is no one company with the best life insurance for every person . Different policies are created to suit different needs and desires . E.g. Nonmed life insurance does not always have the best price , but is the best option for those who hate having their blood taken . Some policies are better for older persons , or persons with health conditions . Other policies wo n't even touch those type of cases . To find the best option for you , call a respected life insurance agent who can ask you the right questions to help you find your best choices .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
The simply answer is that an experienced independent insurance broker works for you and your interests for free . We have access to multiple carriers and can shop unbiased for your best option to meet your unique needs . If you purchase direct from an insurance company , you get one best option and chances are not your best option . The companies you are familiar with advertise and market heavily . That cost is passed on to you as a consumer . Brokers have access to companies you are not familiar with who do not have large marketing budgets and ultimately have more affordable premiums for the same coverage .
The best and cheapest health insurance will be different for each person . For example , if you are under 25 and have a few tickets , a specific insurer may be the best option . However , if you are married and live in another state , a completely different company may be the best option . To get the cheapest rate , I , as an experienced broker , shop all of the major companies so you can quickly compare the most affordable options . Then , you , or any consumer , can quickly determine the company to apply with and secure coverage . The combination of an experienced broker and top-rated website saves money !
Medicare Advantage plans are technically a Medicare replacement plan . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer in traditional Medicare . Rather you are enrolled in a privatized form of Medicare . Your doctor , if they participate in the Medicare Advantage plan you chose , will file claims with your Medicare Advantage plan , not with Medicare . There is no `` best '' Medicare Advantage plan . The one that meets your needs and budget is what is best for you .
That is a great question ! While it is true that at some point the majority of us will need some form of long term care , buying a policy might not be necessary . Many insurers have learned that these policies ate far more profits than they 'd planned , and so they either dropped the policy line altogether , or they scaled back benefits , and raised the prices . In many cases , to the point where they may not really be an affordable option for Elder Citizens . There are insurance policies and annuities that make promises to pay extra for a certain amount of time to cover your LTC needs , but they really need to be looked at carefully , as they often are n't as generous as they first appear . The best solution comes from -LRB- believe it or not -RRB- our Government , that enacted a law in 2006 that went into effect in 2010 that allows for any structured payments -LRB- annuities , 401k payments , etc. -RRB- that are used solely for LTC expenses to be tax free . So it may be that your best option is to fund some retirement accounts , or purchase an annuity or two , and earmark them specifically for that purpose . Depending upon your age , and the amount that you are able to fund , this may be a more affordable option over the long haul , and one that protects your retirement income . It may be beneficial for you to talk this over with a trusted adviser to weigh out which option is best for you . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does My Auto Insurance Cover Hit Run ?
If you have full coverage on your auto policy . A hit and run accident would be covered under collision coverage for a typical auto policy . You will incur the the deductible for your policy unless the party responsible for the accident is found . If the responsible party is found then your insurance company will attempt to recover the amount of the loss and your deductilble from that party . Always remember every policy is different . It is always recommended to read your policy completely to know your exact coverages or to call your local agent to discuss any questions that you may have regarding your policy .
Arizona does not . No-fault auto insurance has the insurance company pay for your damages no matter who 's at fault . In Arizona , we have uninsured and underinsured -LRB- UM/UIM -RRB- insurance for damages other people cause to you if they do n't have insurance or have enough . With state law , you have to sign whether or not you want UM/UIM coverage . Things UM/UIM may cover : A driver hitting you who does n't have insurance A driver hitting you who has insufficient coverage for your hospital bills A hit and run driver A driver who hits you while you 're walking or cycling Your medical bills when you 're a passenger in someone else 's vehicle and they have an accident -LRB- when the other driver 's insurance or theirs is insufficient -RRB- . UM/UIM is an excellent option for people looking for no-fault insurance . In fact , at our agency , we recommend UM/UIM to every one of our policyholders . If you have any questions , do n't hesitate to reach out to us at www.insuranceeddie.com .
generally speaking the answer is no . Insurers use credit information in-bedded in insurance scores . But it does not flow backwards as your question asks , There are two types of scores in most transactions involving credit . There are instances where the requester has to advise you that you are , are for example seeking a loan or credit card . Those are considered `` hard '' hits to your credit . By seeking that type of loan you are in fact telegraphing to others I need the money . Insurance scores typically are `` soft '' hits , that is to say they look at information but do not impact the result . i have run a couple insurers and worked for several others and I have never seen an issue with this being a hard hit
That is a great question ! If you are living in one of the Northern States where snowmobiles can see some use , it 's a good bet that you 'll be required to have some insurance coverage . There are a few really good reasons why it makes sense to get a policy . The first is that any damages or personal injuries that might occur on your property as a rule wo n't be covered by your homeowners policy . If something bad were to happen , you would be left unprotected for the liabilities of costs and damages . Your snowmobile -LRB- and trailer , if you have one -RRB- wo n't be covered under your auto policy either . So again , you would be liable for any damages if something bad were to happen . So what should you purchase ? I 'd strongly recommend the same kind of coverage that you 'd buy for your car - full coverage with comprehensive , collision , and liability . Here 's why - collision is obvious , if you run into something , or roll your sled , it will be covered by this part of the policy . The comprehensive portion covers the other stuff - hitting a deer , water damage busting thru ice , etc. . The liability part covers you for damage to riders , or property . You can add trailers to your policy coverage with some carriers , and that makes sense , as it 's cheap , and does n't get covered by most auto coverage . Sled policies are generally fairly inexpensive , and often can be discounted with multiple sleds , proof of training classes , and bundling with other policies . Most will not charge for non-use periods also . I 'd say it 's definitely something to have before you ever get on your sled , okay ? -LRB- I love this question , I 'm from up North originally myself , and do n't get to answer too many of these type questions here in Texas ! -RRB- Be safe , have fun , and thanks for asking !
That depends on the terms and conditions of your auto policy . Some companies include an accident foregiveness provision automatically for long term policy holders who have been otherwise claims free . Other companies offer similar foregiveness provisions as amendments that you can purchase . Your insurance will also generally not go up if you are the victim of someone else 's negligence - a hit and run for example . Finally , if you hit a deer or some other animal and file a claim , generally your insurance company is not going to increase your premium as a result .
If you have full coverage on your auto policy . A hit and run accident would be covered under collision coverage for a typical auto policy . You will incur the the deductible for your policy unless the party responsible for the accident is found . If the responsible party is found then your insurance company will attempt to recover the amount of the loss and your deductilble from that party . Always remember every policy is different . It is always recommended to read your policy completely to know your exact coverages or to call your local agent to discuss any questions that you may have regarding your policy .
By `` Full Coverage '' I am assuming you mean , does carrying Comprehensive and Collision coverage cover repairs ? If you have a covered claim i.e. - an accident , hit a deer , backed into your wife 's car like I did the other week - then yes , carrying Comprehensive and Collision coverage would pay to fix those covered damages subject to your poilcy deductible . If you are experiencing general vehicle issues , i.e. - motor running roof , transmission mission or other general wear and tear - no , your insurance coverage would not come into play in these cases . Insurance only comes into play to repair a vehilce when there is a covered claim .
I 'm afraid you have confused what comprehensive insurance means . In regards to comprehensive insurance , `` comprehensive '' is a component of auto insurance , but not a type of insurance . comprehensive coverage protects your vehicle from losses that occur by means other than collision . Examples include theft , vandalism , weather damage , hitting a deer , etc. . As far as borrowing someone else 's vehicle , your auto insurance does n't cover you . Their insurance does . That is , auto insurance always follows the vehicle , not the driver .
That is a great question ! The answer will depend upon your company , and the policy restrictions . It may cover for a specified number of days , it may cover until the repairs to your vehicle are completed . A couple of years ago my car was hit , and the driver at faults insurance covered my rental car . After a week , they notified me that they were no longer going to cover the rental car , and it would be my expense . My car was n't finished , and the insurance company had not been in a hurry to see it get finished . After discussing the situation with them , they agreed to pay until my car was completed . They were n't happy , but were liable . If you would like some details on that discussion , contact me , and I 'll share them with you . Thanks for asking !
Dropping collision on your car depends on how much you wish to self insure . As long as you do not have a loan you can drop collision anytime . However one of the more common times to consider dropping collision is if your vehicle is worth $ 3500.00 or less . The reason for this thinking is this is the amount uninsured motorist property damage would pick up in the event you are hit by someone with no insurance . Of course your still on your own if you cause the accident or if your involved in a hit and run type situation where you do n't know who caused the accident . You may want to look at what you actually are paying for collision coverage and what the vehicle is worth in a total loss since this is all your going to get .
The average cost in the US has been around $ 850 for the past several year . My data could be a bit off and old , but in the last several years competition for auto business has kept pricing static . Here is the basic issue question : I do n't know who you are in a demographic sense , but also in the sense of needing coverage to protect yourself . . Auto Insurance is regulated by the various 50 states and can a bit different in what coverages are required to be offered.But here is what typically comprises and auto policy : Bodily Injury Liability -LRB- protection for the people you kill or injure -RRB- Property Damage -LRB- for the car you hit or the 18 wheeler you force off the road unintentionally -RRB- Medical Payments for the little issue that happens in your car that you do n't want to have to file suit against some one to be indemnified -LRB- i.e. your passenger catching their finger in the closing of a door -RRB- Collision for damage to your own car in a wreck or hitting a curb or a pot hole etc. . ComprehensiveCoverage : for theft , flood , hail , falling trees , broken windshields etc And last , but probably the most important coverage on your policy , Uninsured and Under-insured Motorist Coverage So , despite all the ads to the contrary you ought to take more than 15 minutes to figure , with the help of an agent , what exposures you have . The worst scenarios have nothing to do with fixing your cars , it is about fixing peoples lives and keeping you assets . So to answer your question I would need to know what do you have to lose , if you cause injury to someone else , because what you do not pay for in insurance you will pay for on your own including future garnishment of your income . A fairly decent rule of thumb to consider things by would be to look at your lifestyle . If you already own your own home -LRB- including with a mortgage -RRB- you need a minimum of 100/300/100 spit limits of Bodily Injury Coverage -LRB- that protects the people you hit -RRB- and you should carry the same to protect yourself , your family and passengers in your car with the same limit of 100/300/100 for Uninsured and under insured motorist coverage . If you do not understand how all of these pieces of the coverage fit together then you should really seek out an Independent agent who sells for multiple companies and can tailor the policy to your needs If you live in AZ , CA , TX , GA , or MO I would be glad to assist you -LRB- call 1-866-933-4372 -RRB- -LRB- open 8 AM to 8 PM Est Monday through Friday -RRB- . If you live elsewhere seek out an Independent Agent in your area Good luck to you and I hope this answer helps some Jack Heller , CPCU
OK , this will be a quick run down of coverages most commonly needed but the answer may vary some form state to state : The first coverage you need is Bodily Injury Liability . This is the amount of coverage you need to protect yourself from the claims and law suits of people you injure . The second but related coverage is the Property damage coverage for property you destroy . So it is common in the US to sell them in groups such as 100/300/100 . Now what does that mean : The first number is critical . This is the per person limit of bodily injury liability . Insurers are not stupid . They know that in 75 % of all accidents , there will be one person in each vehicle -LRB- it is just the way Americans drive -RRB- So , there is a lot less likelihood of hitting that 300,000 but it would take injury to more than one person to do it . So the odds are with your insurer . Another way to buy insurance -LRB- usually about 10 % more in cost -RRB- is through Combined Single Limits coverage , CSL gives you one bulk sum to pay the claim more as the accident happened rather than based on the sub limits of your policy . So split limits are the norm , but for a little more you might want combined single limit coverage . The next coverage is usually PIP or Medical Payments . Both of these sort of compensate for usually minor events for which the party is injured and you want to take care of the injury regardless of fault . For example you give a ride to a friend who slams the door on his finger . Yes it was his fault , but it was your car and you do n't want suing you over this . Your policy responds with either medical payment or Personal Injury . PIP is usually broader and often includes wages loss which Med Pay does not . The next group of coverages are usually the most important on your policy . These are your uninsured or under-insured motorist coverage . In about 14 % of accidents the at fault party will have no insurance . And in the next grouping of the accidents you will see coverage of the at fault party at state minimums or not much more . . Now you need the protection of UM coverage . A good rule of thumb is never buy less UM than you have for Bodily Injury Liability . This is now you protecting yourself , your family and passengers in your car . It is perhaps the most little understood coverage and most important part of your policy.Lastly as respects UM/UIM you need Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Property Damage at a level commensurate with the ACV of you car . Next come the coverages on the physical damage to your car . The coverages are Comprehensive or also called OTC or Other than Collision . which covers many perils such as theft , fire , flood , trees falling on the vehicle etc. . Collision occurs when you hit something such as a tree , a road curb , a pothole , another vehicle etc. . This is where the value of your car is a consideration . You should also select a deductible that is right for you and your household budget From here we go to many ancillary coverages including Rental Reimbursement which is usually stated as a dollar limit for thirty days -LRB- enough time usually to get your car repaired -RRB- > The coverage is triggered by another cause of loss such as collision . The next and perhaps last coverage to consider for the general public is towing or as some companies offer road side assistance . Towing is just that towing . Whereas roadside service is usually sign and drive towing , run out of gas , lock out of car etc. . Now if you have a new car you might want replacement coverage or if leased gap coverage for loan or lease . If you do n't understand any of this gives us a call , We believe an educated consumer is better for every one .
In Illinois damage to the car you are driving caused by a hit and run driver is covered under the collision portion of the policy insuring the vehicle . Again in Illinois , when you have no collision coverage , uninsured motorist property damage coverage is available , but applicable only when it can be verified that the at-fault driver has no insuance . If you are hurt , your medical coverage would apply . Uninsured motorist coverage for your financial loss as a result of injury is included in Illinois auto insurance , but again would require verification that the other party is not insured . Check with your agent . Laws vary by state .
If your car is damaged as a result of a hit and run caused by another party , then the Collision coverage provided in your auto policy will be used to pay for the damage repair . Unfortunately , the settlement from your insurance company will be subject to your deductible .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
In Canada , basic life insurance covers all cause of death including accidental death . In fact life insurance even covers suicide after the policy is in force for 2 years -LRB- or 2 years after reinstatement -RRB- We used to describe accidental death insurance as shock insurance , since there is no time to prepare . Often it is challenging to determine if a death or not . For example , a driver goes off the road and hits a tree and dies , did his heart stop before hitting the tree -LRB- natural causes -RRB- or after he hit the tree -LRB- accidental death -RRB- . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Comprehensive is a coverage of your insurance . Comprehensive means other then collision . So in other words if your auto is damaged from a non collision event and you carry comprehensive coverage on your auto policy you would be covered for the damage minus your deductible . Such claims include , theft , vandalism , glass breakage , falling objects to name a few . The key is to remember other then collision . If you hit something or if something or someone hits you this is collision .
Yes and auto insurance carrier at their discretion can bring a law suit against you . Auto insurance companies only sue to recover their loss and no more . So for example you caused an accident and they person you hit used his or her insurance to pay for the damage to their car because you had no insurance . The insurance company may want to recover what they paid out since their client was not at fault . Therefore the insurance company could take you to court to recover the monies spent for the repairs . No lets take it a step further . Say you were the one who was hit and were also injured . Your insurance company if they did not pay for your injuries will not sue for injury , pain and suffering and so on since the insurance company did not suffer a loss in this area . Again , insurance companies will only try to recover their own loss .
No . The guaranteed side simply means the coverage is guaranteed to remain in effect until that point as long as the premiums are continued to be paid at their current rate - as universal life insurance is defined as flexible premium coverage , you have the option to increase the premium you 're paying to extend the guarantee side . The current side determines when the coverage would actually run out - however , the current side is always subject to change as it reflects whatever the current interest rates are . If the interest rates change , then the current side will change as well . In addition , if the carrier raises their costs of insurance charges under the policy , then the cash value can be depleted even faster thus lowering the current side coverage projection even further . If you 're unsure what you have , you can contact the carrier to send you an up-to-date illustration -LRB- a coverage projection citing how long the coverage will remain in force based on today 's figures -RRB- . It sounds to me as though the policy that you have is a current assumption universal life program rather than a guaranteed universal life program -LRB- which can guarantee premiums remain fixed and guaranteed up to age 121 -RRB- . Current assumption policies typically have limited guarantees under their programs and require additional premiums if the cash value is depleted - meaning they will `` crash '' if the cash value hits $ 0 -LRB- you would therefore need to pay more in premiums above what you 're already spending to keep the coverage going or else it will lapse -RRB- . Guaranteed universal life policies state that even if the cash value hits $ 0 , the coverage will still continue as long as your regularly scheduled premiums are paid . If you prefer to have something that guarantees coverage for life rather than risking coverage lapsing after age 75 , you may want to consider setting up a guaranteed universal life policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you have Collision coverage on your auto policy , then you have coverage for damage to your car as a result of hitting a stationary object . A curb would certainly qualify as a stationary object . Collision coverage provides benefits if you hit another motor vehicle , a stationary object or a human being . Comprehensive coverage takes care of other physiecal damage or loss such as flooding , beiiung hit by a falling or flying object , fire , theft , vandalism , etc. . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specifics of your policy to gain a broader understanding of the benefits that it provides and any limitations or exclusions it may contain .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How much is health insurance for a family of 3 ?
Florida participates in Obamacare Health Insurance Marketplace . Under that system , here 's what drives the price : # of people in household and their age , total income of those people , and the county they live in . It 's best to have an agent run the numbers for you . They can guide you to coverage and plans that meet your needs . If your family is lower income , you may find that the cost is ZERO !
Cost of health insurance is driven by many things . Age of the three people : Age plays a big role in the cost of health insurance . Although this has been smoothed out a bit due to the ACA there is still a big price difference based on age of the consumer Benefit levels : A high deductible plan is going to have a lower premium than a copay plan . The size of deductibles , amount of up front coverage , copay levels and many other factors will drive the price of insurance benefits . ACA plans : ACA plans `` Obama Care '' premiums are determined by income level . The lower the income , the higher the subsidy will be toward the premium . This can lower the cost tremendously and even lower it to no cost per month if the income is low enough . Every additional family member increase the amount of family income that can be made and still receive a subsidy . Be careful however , if someone understates their income , they will be subject to paying it back when they do their taxes the following year . Someone could be receiving a $ 600 a month subsidy based on an income of $ 18,000 a year and then have to give all of it back when they do their tax return and it shows they really made $ 48,000 .
As an Insurance Broker , I want to think it depends on your age and what type of Heath plan you want . Example high deductible or a low deductible Health Plan . My best suggest is to look at what is your cost for any medication you may be on . Find out does your doctor / doctorsHealth plan . The way you will leverage your time and your money . Omeca Best , 866-491-1491
It truly depends on the deductibles and coinsurance chosen along with any additional coverage like accident , critical illness , or dental . Higher out of pocket costs will lower premium while lower deductibles and coinsurance will raise premiums . Typically on an ACA plan , the average policy for a family of 3 that I have written has been in the $ 400 dollar range which included some bells and whistles . For a no obligation quote please contact me @ 843-450-9879 or visit my website @ www.hinchfinanicalgroup.com .
There are many factors that can contribute to the cost of your insurance . First , there is the type of plan that you choose . A more basic plan that covers only emergency or sickness will cost less on your monthly premiums , but will most likely not cover wellness visits . A more comprehensive plan that covers various wellness visits and tests will be more expensive on your monthly premium , but may save you money in the long run due finding health problems before a catastrophic illness . Other contributing factors are age , lifestyle and previous medical conditions . A person who is in decent health at average height and weight will pay less than someone who is overweight , uses tobacco and has a preexisting medical condition . Options that you choose for your medical plan can also raise or lower your premium . Going with a low annual deductible will cause your monthly premium be higher versus going with a higher deductible . If you are relatively healthy and are comfortable with having a higher out-of-pocket cost will save on the premium . Of course , if you do end up needing to go to the doctor or having a test done , you may end up paying more due to the deductible . Also , having a doctor visit copay option on your plan may make going to the doctor easier to pay , but that option will add to your premium . Health insurance can be a confusing thing to purchase . By doing your research and contacting an agent , it can be a little less confusing and help save you and your family from a financial crisis .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
Up to a point , yes . Carriers will charge more for your health insurance if you add on a spouse and children -LRB- dependents -RRB- . How many children you add as dependents can affect how much you pay for your health insurance . However , once a family size reaches a certain point , the coverage increases based on the number of dependents stops . For example , carrier A may say if you have 3 or more kids , it 'll be the same price as only having 3 kids . If you have 5 kids , you may only have to pay the amount as if you had 3 kids . Some carriers may make this 2 or more , some 4 or more - it just depends on the carrier . Make sure when you 're gathering quotes , you look at these specific items if you have a lot of children as your question indicates . It 's most helpful to work with an independent health agent who can compare multiple options for you -LRB- and in the process save you a ton of time on research and effort trying to understand the stuff -RRB- . Our group is licensed with a number of carriers and we do not charge any fees for our services so if you 'd like some assistance with your coverage , feel free to e-mail me or give me a call - you can see my contact information via my profile page link . I hope the information is helpful . Thanks very much .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
I suggest a number of different approaches . How much coverage would you want the person to carry if they injured you or your family or damaged your property in a car accident ? If you cause an accident , injure family members riding with you and are from a state permitting intra-family suits , how much coverage would you want available to pay for their injuries ? And of course , how much do you stand to lose ? What is your net worth , the value of your earning power , and/or the value of your personal integrity ? None of these methods will lead you to the perfect limit but they are the considerations I would suggest one think about when selecting the appropriate amount of insurance . In addition , I always suggest your uninsured/under-insured motorists coverage -LRB- the one that covers you , your family and possibly the passengers in your car in case the other car is not insured or poorly insured -RRB- be consistent with the coverage you carry in case you hurt someone else . However if none of these considerations apply , one must always be aware of the minimum limits required by most state laws .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Start by computing your current salary times the number of years to retirement and factor in a 3 % average wage increase annually . You will be astonished at how much money you will probably earn . If your family is deprived of that income , plus the shocking loss of you , what will be the impact ? Is it reasonable that your spouse could continue to care for the children while meeting the financial needs of the family ? Are there aspirations for your children ? Do you want them to go to college ? You are very important to your family , dont underestimate your worth .
It all depends on what he wants the insurance for . Husbands tend to have a lot that their income is dependent on -LRB- household , family , college dreams for children , etc -RRB- and as such the loss of his income can have devastating effects on a family . The amount of insurance he should have will depend on how much he currently earns and how much he has the potential to contribute to the continuation of the dreams for his family . I would suggest that both Husband and wife sit down with an Insurance Professional and come to a dollar amount of coverage they feel they would need to adequately fulfill their family wishes .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Number Of Car Doors Affect Insurance ?
The number of car doors can indeed impact what you pay for your car insurance rates . There are specific models where a four-door rate will be different than a two-door rate . This could be because of cost , crash test results or other data the insurer gathers . It does not impact all vehicles but just selected models .
Not these days , and nor does the color . The Insurance Industry has evolved a great deal over the years and now uses much more sophisticated elements in their pricing and risk analysis . The year , make model and VIN tell an underwriting matrix much more about the risk along with your driving and credit history than does the number of doors the car may have .
That is a great question ! It is n't so much the number of doors , as it is the make and model of the car . A sports car is generally going to be more expensive to insure than a station wagon , typically because of the way they are driven . Statistically , the sports car will be more likely to be involved in an accident or garner traffic violations , than the pedestrian , family car . The sports car will typically be more expensive than the average family sedan also , making the premiums higher . That is what will cost you , not the number of doors , so much . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! It is n't so much the number of doors , as it is the make and model of the car . A sports car is generally going to be more expensive to insure than a station wagon , typically because of the way they are driven . Statistically , the sports car will be more likely to be involved in an accident or garner traffic violations , than the pedestrian , family car . The sports car will typically be more expensive than the average family sedan also , making the premiums higher . That is what will cost you , not the number of doors , so much . Thanks for asking !
The number of car doors can indeed impact what you pay for your car insurance rates . There are specific models where a four-door rate will be different than a two-door rate . This could be because of cost , crash test results or other data the insurer gathers . It does not impact all vehicles but just selected models .
It really depends heavily on the homeowner carrier chosen and the type of pool , whether in-ground or above-ground . In Florida , the premium will also be affected by the presence of a screened-in pool . While the screened-in situation helps with the accidental fall peril factors on the liability side , the screen has a negative effect in terms of its vulnerability to wind damage on the property side . Security devices in and around the pool and access doors can have an affect on the pricing . Bottom line is that carriers view and rate pools differently . You really need to get some rate comparisons .
Over the years car insurance providers as well as providers of other insurance solutions , have evolved their underwriting review practices in order to better evaluate the risk they are being asked to insure . Many years ago things like the color of a car or whether it had 2 or 4 doors would affect the premiums paid . These days , hoewever , insurance companies are much more sophisticated intheir evaluation rocedures and many have included credit history when evaluating an applicants ; request . Simnilar to one 's driving record and accident history , a credit report can help an insurance companyu to better understand the risk factors of one 's life style . Thus , a better credit history , along with a clean drigving record , hepls an insurer to feel more confident that they are insuring a person less inclined toward risky decisions .
Life insurance on a child should never be at the expense of life insurance on the breadwinner . Historically these policies were sold door to door on a weekly premium basis . While parents were concerned about the possible cost of the death of a child they were actually sold as savings plans . My parents gave me my paid up $ 2000 policy when I got married . Today the reason to buy such a policy is even more obscure . A small number of children become uninsurable and a very small number die ; however , this insurance might still help bring peace of mind to a parent .
Not these days , and nor does the color . The Insurance Industry has evolved a great deal over the years and now uses much more sophisticated elements in their pricing and risk analysis . The year , make model and VIN tell an underwriting matrix much more about the risk along with your driving and credit history than does the number of doors the car may have .
If you mean does yourhomeownersinsurance cover garage doors for a named peril then yes . Named perils would be fire , or collision -LRB- car running into it -RRB- to name the top two . If you refer to the Garage door malfunctioning in some capacity then the answer would be no . Mechanical breakdown is not a peril of a homeowners insurancepolicy Some insurance carriers are just now starting to offermechanicalbreakdowncoverage ` sfor an extra premium on your home insurance policy . Discuss with your local agent to see if this is an option available to you .
Medical coverage covers anyone getting into your car , getting out of your car or in the car if you are involved in an accident and they are hurt . For example , a person is getting out of your car and falls and breaks an arm ; a person hand is caught in a car door and requires medical treatment . The most common however is when you are involved in an accident . Anyone in your car is covered up to the medical pay limits on your policy .
There are hobbies or professions that can indeed affect the pricing of Life Insurance and if you happen to be a skydiver , recreational or otherwise , you can at the very least expect to pay more than say , the bank employee who lives next door who plays golf on the weekends . Premium is a reflection of the risk that the insurance company is assuming when they offer coverage . Thus , the greater the risk that their could be a claim filed , the greater the premium charged .
Many years ago , underwriting and risk analysis that was employed by insurance companies was much less sophisticated than it is today , so there was a time that the color of a car or the number of it 's doors or if it was a convertable may have had an impact . Not today , however . Statistical analysis and risk evaluations have become much more in depth and as such , more accurately reflect the pricing for a given rist that an insurance company is willing to take on . Today , though the color of a car may not matter , one 's credit score very well may . In addition , companies now have millions of data elements for any particular type , year , make and model of a car that they did not have back in the day .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
More than likely not these days . There was a time many years ago when having a red car , or one with 2 instead of 4 doors or a convertible vs a hard top may have had an effect on car insurance premiums . I think we would all agree that looking back on it , these were pretty subjective standards . These days underwriting is much more sophisticated . Today , companies use vehicle identification numbers to track statistics for loss history and repair costs among a great many other things in order to develop proper premium .
OK , this will be a quick run down of coverages most commonly needed but the answer may vary some form state to state : The first coverage you need is Bodily Injury Liability . This is the amount of coverage you need to protect yourself from the claims and law suits of people you injure . The second but related coverage is the Property damage coverage for property you destroy . So it is common in the US to sell them in groups such as 100/300/100 . Now what does that mean : The first number is critical . This is the per person limit of bodily injury liability . Insurers are not stupid . They know that in 75 % of all accidents , there will be one person in each vehicle -LRB- it is just the way Americans drive -RRB- So , there is a lot less likelihood of hitting that 300,000 but it would take injury to more than one person to do it . So the odds are with your insurer . Another way to buy insurance -LRB- usually about 10 % more in cost -RRB- is through Combined Single Limits coverage , CSL gives you one bulk sum to pay the claim more as the accident happened rather than based on the sub limits of your policy . So split limits are the norm , but for a little more you might want combined single limit coverage . The next coverage is usually PIP or Medical Payments . Both of these sort of compensate for usually minor events for which the party is injured and you want to take care of the injury regardless of fault . For example you give a ride to a friend who slams the door on his finger . Yes it was his fault , but it was your car and you do n't want suing you over this . Your policy responds with either medical payment or Personal Injury . PIP is usually broader and often includes wages loss which Med Pay does not . The next group of coverages are usually the most important on your policy . These are your uninsured or under-insured motorist coverage . In about 14 % of accidents the at fault party will have no insurance . And in the next grouping of the accidents you will see coverage of the at fault party at state minimums or not much more . . Now you need the protection of UM coverage . A good rule of thumb is never buy less UM than you have for Bodily Injury Liability . This is now you protecting yourself , your family and passengers in your car . It is perhaps the most little understood coverage and most important part of your policy.Lastly as respects UM/UIM you need Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Property Damage at a level commensurate with the ACV of you car . Next come the coverages on the physical damage to your car . The coverages are Comprehensive or also called OTC or Other than Collision . which covers many perils such as theft , fire , flood , trees falling on the vehicle etc. . Collision occurs when you hit something such as a tree , a road curb , a pothole , another vehicle etc. . This is where the value of your car is a consideration . You should also select a deductible that is right for you and your household budget From here we go to many ancillary coverages including Rental Reimbursement which is usually stated as a dollar limit for thirty days -LRB- enough time usually to get your car repaired -RRB- > The coverage is triggered by another cause of loss such as collision . The next and perhaps last coverage to consider for the general public is towing or as some companies offer road side assistance . Towing is just that towing . Whereas roadside service is usually sign and drive towing , run out of gas , lock out of car etc. . Now if you have a new car you might want replacement coverage or if leased gap coverage for loan or lease . If you do n't understand any of this gives us a call , We believe an educated consumer is better for every one .
People with many forms of mental illness can get life insurance . Bear in mind that this term can cover a wide range of impairments . I know firsthand that many of them are insurable . A lot of it boils down to the need for the life insurance . Almost anybody can qualify for a burial policy . Depending on the age of the insured , and the state of residence , a number of small policies could be available . Wont cost too much , and gets the job done . But what if you need more substantial coverage ? For example , I worked with a family who had an adult son who is mentally retarded . He was reasonably self-sufficient . He actually worked for his father part-time , and did missionary work first church . He had the skills and personality to go door-to-door and spread his gospel . The insurance company gave us money for not just final expenses , but then some for the family . There was a co-dependence there that was insurable . You can see that people who are mentally ill can establish themselves as a valued member of the group . The members of the group therefore have an insurable interest in them , and deserve money to compensate for their loss . And this could include people with many other impairments . Autism , depression , severe anxiety , PTSD . ADD . OCD . People with any and all of these can be fairly high functioning , and therefore insurable . Dont forget one other important item : planning for people with special needs . Folks with impairments can be functional , but can also remain dependent on their family members . What if those family members die ? Life insurance is needed on on the parents , or responsible siblings , so that the dependent family member can remain self-sufficient . Now , with regard to the choice of carrier : there is not a hot list of companies that take people with mental illness . Potential applicants need to be prequalified to identify the carrier with the most interest in this particular case at this particular time . And that could change from quarter to quarter , or from year-to-year . It is the job of the broker to know which companies like which types of cases .
In Montana you can not legally own a car titled in your name only you would have to have an adult on the title . In that case they would have insure the car or you can get insurance but you would have to list the adult as a driver . also which would make the rates much lower then on your own . The carriers that we use at our agency the average teen with a clean driving record cost about 100 a month with liability only on most 4 door cars trucks are a bit more . . I would talk to a local agent and find out what your state guidelines are
A garage door is part of the dwelling so this means the garage door is covered by the same perils of the policy as the rest of the home minus your deductible . If it 's attached to the home is part of the home . If it falls free then it 's personal property and not dwelling .
`` Prime America '' is actually Primerica Life Insurance . This company grew from its ' original roots as A.L. Williams , a door-to-door term life carrier . Primerica sells term coverage through captive agents that are recruited to join , but know little or nothing about the business and are therefore prime candidates to sell one product . In my opinion , they are to be avoided . While never have dealt with them myself , many clients of mine have had negative stories to tell about various aspects of their sales process .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Regulates Long-Term Care Insurance In Oregon ?
Long-Term Care Insurance in Oregon is regulated by the Oregon Insurance Division , based in Salem , Oregon , the nation 's capitol . The state 's Insurance Division administers their Insurance Code to make sure that Long Term Care Insurance meets the standards they have set . This pamphlet is helpful for becoming acquainted with the regulations for Long Term Care Insurance in Oregon : WEBSITELINK
Long-Term Care Insurance in Oregon is regulated by the Oregon Insurance Division , based in Salem , Oregon , the nation 's capitol . The state 's Insurance Division administers their Insurance Code to make sure that Long Term Care Insurance meets the standards they have set . This pamphlet is helpful for becoming acquainted with the regulations for Long Term Care Insurance in Oregon : WEBSITELINK
Yes you can . It is called Short Term Medical -LRB- STM -RRB- and it is available in most states . It allows you to purchase a STM policy for , usually , up to 6 months . After that you can usually apply for 6 more months if you still qualify . You can choose a plan for a little as 30 days and you can not have other insurance in place during the time you will have your STM in place . STM does not cover pre-existing conditions . It only covers you for what happens from the date your plan starts to the date your plan ends and therefore it costs a lot less than a traditional plan . Remember they do not have to renew your plan if you ended up using your plan for something significant , health wise . STM is a great plan for healthy adults whom have 6 months left before turning 65 . It has saved a lot of my healthy clients money during those 6 months before Medicare kicks in . It 's a great plan for those in between jobs who ca n't afford the high cost of COBRA and for those whom start a new job and have a 30-60 day waiting period before their new companies insurance kicks in . Remember , it does NOT cover pre-existing such as a hernia you got diagnosed over a year ago but did n't do something about then that ruptures during your STM plan period . I just signed up a 21 year old for one month in Oregon and the cost for a $ 500 deductible , 80/20 plan was only $ 60 including the $ 20 one time enrollment fee . You can view a few plan options here for Oregon and Assurant , which is available in most States . www.coveroregon.cc Click on Products at the top of the page and then scroll down and on the right hand side it will say Short Term Medical ; to give you an idea of rates . Make sure to click on Assurant for rates outside of Oregon . Short Term Medical is a great option for those whom did not sign up during Open Enrollment and are healthy , just looking to be protected from an accident , emergency room visit , unexpected illness , spider bite , etc. .
Minimum coverage is applied different in every State . In Oregon you are required to carry Liability coverage with a minimum bodily injury/property damage limit at $ 25,000 / $ 50,000 / $ 20000 . This is the minimum coverage to drive legally in the State of Oregon . Your lienholder might have other requirements to protect their investment , and require you to carry comprehensive and collision coverage as well . I always ask clients if you carry the minimum coverage of $ 25,000 and injure someone in an auto accident . Would you be able to pay the difference if they sue you for $ 100,000 . If the answer is no , then you should consider increasing your liability limits . In the State of Oregon you can not file bankruptcy on a judgement from and accident and the difference is normaly paid through wage garnishments and judgements.Its well worth the extra money for the extra protection .
The average cost of life insurance in Oregon depends on many factors . One big factor is age . A $ 250,000 twenty year Term policy for a 30 year old male at the best health class averages about $ 200 per year . At age 50 , the average rate for that same policy is approximately $ 600 per year IF he still has excellent health . The length of the term is also a big factor . Shorter terms cost less , but as can be seen in the example above . locking in the premium for as long as possible is often a good idea . That is partly because health also greatly affects life insurance rates , and health is more apt to slip away as people age . To find the average life insurance cost in the state of Oregon for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes and test out some different face amounts and term lengths . Then give that agency a call so that you can be sure all your health details are taken into consideration . That will help you get a fair price .
There are two distribution channels for disability : the career and brokerage channel . Most planners recommend utilizing the brokerage channel because of their access to the full inventory of disability carriers . Mutual of Omaha is a leader is short term disability insurance . Standard of Oregon is a leader in long term disability insurance .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
I 'll add to the above that it also depends on the state you live in , your medical condition and how long you want the policy for . Purchasing a Whole Life or IUL policy at 65 probably would n't be your best move . * smile * That being said ... For a `` Preferred '' male , non-tabacco living in Oregon on a 10 year Term plan : $ 100,000 Death Benefit : $ 64 - $ 220/mo . depending on the company $ 250,000 Death Benefit : $ 130-393 / mo. depending on the company As you can see it 's best to shop around .
Every state has different laws . In Oregon , insurance follows the vehicle , so every vehicle on the roadneeds to have insurance . Most policies give coverage for a permissive driver , however as the owner of the vehicle your insurance will pay out if that person has an accident . With that being said all drivers in your household need to be rated on your policy to ensure your coverage is not denied at the time of a claim . People who live in another household do not need to be rated on your policy and your policy should coverage them , you just need ask your agent to make sure you have coverage for a permissive driver .
There are several excellent disability insurance companies , but in the end only ten that are with considering . The cost is a significant item of review , but the languages in the contractual definitions are the real key to disability policies . So its important to do your due care . That being said , Standard of Oregon is a consistent player in this market and a top recommendation .
When you are looking for life insurance in Oregon , the best life insurance is the one that has your best rate , is appropriate for your needs , and is from a highly rated company . There is no one life insurance company or product that fits that bill for everyone . To find your best quote , use a reliable agency to help you weed out the the bad options and let you choose from some good options for you .
You may have disability coverage through Social Security . You may have disability insurance at work through your employer sponsored group benefit plan . But if you need individual disability insurance you need to seek objective advice from a independent agent with access to many disability companies like Standard of Oregon .
There are many disability insurance companies available in the U.S. market . In the brokerage distribution channel Standard of Oregon , Principle , Met Life , Assurity , Illinois Mutual , Lloyd 's of London , Mutual of Omaha , Fidelity and Lloyds of London . In the career channel there is Mass Mutual and Guardian . There are others , but these are the players in disability insurance .
There are several excellent disability companies in the U.S. Which one is right for you may depend on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition ? It may also depend on the amount of benefit youre seeking . Using a bidding process based on your needs can help you select the right company . But for the most part based on price and contract definitions , Standard of Oregon is a high recommendation .
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
Since Medicare covers people over the age of 65 , and those with certain disabilities that have received Social Security benefits for 25 months , it would be very rare for Medicare to cover a circumcision . It would be possible , if someone with Medicare had a true medical need to be circumcisized later in the life , but very rare , as most circumcisions are done at birth . Given the fact that 40 % of births in American are covered by Medicaid , a better question may be `` Does Medicaid cover circumcisions ? '' That varies by state , as 18 states currently do not cover this procedure , primarily due to the fact that it is most often elective , or not necessary . the 18 states that do n't cover circumcisions , along with the year they stopped : Colorado 2011 South Carolina 2011 Louisiana 2005 Idaho 2005 Minnesota 2005 Maine 2004 Montana 2003 Utah 2003 Florida 2003 Missouri 2002 Arizona 2002 North Carolina 2002 California before 1999 North Dakota before 1999 Oregon before 1999 Mississippi before 1999 Nevada before 1999 Washington before 1999
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Are Bed Bugs Covered By Geico Renters Insurance ?
I ca n't specifically speak for Geico because I do n't represent them and I have n't read their policies . I can however , speak from 22 years in this business as both a captive and an independent agent with many years of advanced education . There are usually two coverage forms that are used in renters policies , Broad Form and Special Form . Broad Form lists which perils you 're property is insured against and insects are not one of them . Special Form covers everything except what 's excluded and insects are excluded so , in general , no , bed bugs would not be covered . The fact that this question had to be posed here is testament to why you need a good agent . A good agent would be able to answer such a question and , if he/she could n't , they could find out and would get back to you quickly . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . Even if they cost a little more , they 'll save you big dollars in the long run .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
I ca n't specifically speak for Geico because I do n't represent them and I have n't read their policies . I can however , speak from 22 years in this business as both a captive and an independent agent with many years of advanced education . There are usually two coverage forms that are used in renters policies , Broad Form and Special Form . Broad Form lists which perils you 're property is insured against and insects are not one of them . Special Form covers everything except what 's excluded and insects are excluded so , in general , no , bed bugs would not be covered . The fact that this question had to be posed here is testament to why you need a good agent . A good agent would be able to answer such a question and , if he/she could n't , they could find out and would get back to you quickly . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . Even if they cost a little more , they 'll save you big dollars in the long run .
A homeowners insurance policy will not typically cover for a claim cause by bed bugs . Bed bugs would be considered a vermin which is normally excluded from coverage within a homeowners policy . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that may be contained within .
The nature of a renters policy is to compensate you for damages that you suffer . An infestation of bed bugs might not meet the criteria of damages . The policy pays these damages for specified perils and insect infestation is either excluded or not included in the list of most policies . The renters policy is not designed to address routine maintenance issues .
Bed bugs are considered a vermin . Typically all homeowners and renters insurance policies do not cover vermin along with other specified exclusions . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusion that it may contain or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Renters Insurance does not cover bed bugs . Insects and vermin are a common exclusion on all property policies . This situation would call for an exterminator . If you are unsure and have additional questions I always recommend you contact your local independent agent who can assist you with these type of questions and more . Also an independent agent can help find you the right policy for your needs .
A homeowners policy is designed to pay for damages to your residence . The list of perils that the company insures against is lengthy but insects are specifically excluded in most policies . Eradication of bed bugs is not a covered loss under the policy . It is certainly a condition that should be corrected .
The key to understanding Homeowners coverage is the word damage . While an insect infestation is messy and expensive it rarely results in damage . The language in your homeowners policy probably excludes damage caused by insects . There is a provision for unsuspected termite damage but rarely anything for bed bugs .
Things like bed bugs and other insects -LRB- under the designation of vermin -RRB- are typically excluded from coverage under renters and homeowners policies . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Renters or homeowners insurance will not cover bug infestation of any kind or damage caused by insects . Any damage or infestation caused by insects , rodents and vermin are excluded from property polices . If you have a specific scenero I always recommend you discuss the details with your local insurance agent .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed when a doctor prescribes use of the bed as being medically necessary and when the person needing the bed is covered by Medicare Part B. To qualify for the care as medically necessary , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You can not change positions in a normal bed 2 -RRB- You need that type of bed to change positions for pain relief 3 -RRB- You need to sleep with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees for medical reasons 4 -RRB- You need traction equipment that must be attached to a hospital bed
No , that is generally not a covered peril . A homeowners policy would not cover any type of extermination , bats , bugs rats or otherwise . A homeowners policy is designed to cover natural perils such as fire , wind , hail etc. . Some homeowners policy will cover a broad range of perils but usually things like bats would be excluded . Check with your agent and make sure .
you can expect the unexpected to hit Renters just the same as home owners . Both for example would have an exposure to fire and it may mean that the renter is more exposed to fire than a homeowner . With a renter you have no real way of knowing that the guy who lives below you smokes while going to sleep , but you are exposed to that . Additionally you liability issues that actually may be greater than a single family insured customer because of something in your lifestyle that makes you more likely to be a danger to your neighbor > Back in the 1970 's it was not uncommon to see young people using water beds . But you can imagine the problems that might ensue form a water bed falling apart in the way of creating a liability to the neighbor who lives below you . Many apartment management companies have therefore have gone to requiring some level of protection you offer them with your renters policy .
Geico does not actually insure Renters or Homeowners . Geico partners with other insurance companies like Travelers and ASI who provide the insurance . Geico claims to cut out the middle man but that 's simply not true . Geico is an independent agency just like every local agency in your community . Geico just spends a tremendous amount of money to convince the public they are the cheapest and the best . It 's simple not true .
Guidelines for what type of bed Medicare will pay for varies by state . In all states , Medicare will not pay for the cost of a fully electric bed . However , Medicare will pay for the cost of a semi-electric bed when there is a medical necessity for that type of bed . You can then pay for the difference so that you can purchase a fully electric bed , if desired .
Infections acquired during a hospital stay are a growing problem . Due to the sterile environment , only the strongest `` bugs '' -LRB- viruses and bacteria -RRB- can survive . Hospital infections are considered just like any other illness and will be covered by Medicare . With that in mind , hospitals may not bill Medicare if they readily admit their liability .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
In all honesty the ACA or Obamacare as you call it , is n't going anywhere . It 's here to stay as it has been very successful getting off the ground . It will evolve over time to fix the bugs that are in it , but going away ? Nope . Here 's the thing I have been an insurance agent just about 28 years . Every one of those years there was some sort of change involving health insurance , every one . The ACA is simply just another plan change .
To prepare for your life insurance exam , I agree with Matt 's advice . In addition , drink lots of water ahead of time , and try to avoid extremes -LRB- e.g. do n't overeat , overdrink , overexercise , or hang around heavy smokers -RRB- the day before your exam . If you do n't feel well , put off your exam , especially if you have diabetes , MS or other health conditions that can be exasperated by having a bug . Finally , be prepared to answer health questions that you may have answered before . Asking the same question more than once helps convince insurance companies that the information is correct .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Does Disability Employee Mean ?
Disability employee could mean an employee that has a disability . Or it could be an employee of a disability insurance company . Or it could be someone who manages disability plans for a business . It is not a common term and the meaning would depend on the context in which it is used .
I am going to assume you want to know what constitutes a disability for an employee . This is governed by the definition of disability contained in the insurance policy providing coverage . The most difficult definition is the inability to do any work that the employee is trained to do . Other definitions are the inability to do the work in which the employee is currently engaged .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
An employer can not discriminate against an employee based upon their age -LRB- among a multitude of other factors -RRB- . However , that does not necessarily mean that an older employee who compares what they are contributing towards their employer based health insurance with a younger co-worker of the same coverage level will find themselves paying the same amount . This may initially be perceived by the older employee as though they are being discriminated against but this is almost certainly not the case . If your employer 's group health insurance rates are age based rates then there is a different rate for each year of age for a covered employee . The community rating requirements of ObamaCare have pushed many health insurance carriers towards this age rated basis though some health insurance carriers still develop a `` composite '' rate for a group after quoting them on an age rated basis -LRB- composite rates are one rate for every employee with Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Employee + Child -LRB- ren -RRB- or Family coverage regardless of the employee 's age -RRB- . This is how things work under community rating . First of all , there can be no more than a 3 to 1 ratio between the rates for the youngest and oldest employees in the group . To keep things simple let 's say the monthly rate for a 25 year old is $ 200 per month then the monthly rate for a 60 year old would be $ 600 per month . Then let 's say that your employer pays 50 % of the employee only rate which leaves the other 50 % for the employee to pay . Under this scenario the 25 year old 's cost would be $ 100 per month -LRB- $ 200 x 50 % -RRB- and the 60 year old 's share would be $ 300 per month -LRB- $ 600 x 50 % -RRB- . Even though the dollar amount paid by each employee differs significantly the employer is treating them the same in that the employer is contributing the same percentage amount towards each employee 's coverage . Therefore , there is no discrimination . This is one of the effects of ObamaCare that is increasingly being seen by employees as their old health insurance plans and rate structures are being replaced by ObamaCare compliant plans and the new community rating method .
Disability employee could mean an employee that has a disability . Or it could be an employee of a disability insurance company . Or it could be someone who manages disability plans for a business . It is not a common term and the meaning would depend on the context in which it is used .
What does it mean to become fully vested in a retirement plan ? What it pertains to is the percentage an employee gets from employer contributions to their retirement plan . Fully vested means that the employee now `` owns '' 100 % of his/hers employer contributions to their retirement plans . The most common vesting schedule is a 5 year schedule that begins with 20 % and finishes at 100 % . Once at 100 % with no breaks in service you stay at 100 % . If an employee were to separate service after a year , they would take 100 % of their contributions and only 20 % of any employer matching .
what does Simple retirement plan mean ? It means that someone is using a boilerplate retirement plan created by the IRS to provide a retirement program for a small business . I love Simples as their name says it all . A Simple is a straight forward plan design with only a few requirements to comply with to have the plan . The best part for a small business owner is it costs next to nothing to provide . There is no testing of the plan which costs money . Just a nominal per head fee of active participants . The employer does n't pay fees for testing employees and accounting for employees who are n't in the plan . For a small business a Simple is a great choice for putting a retirement plan together for employees .
403 -LRB- b -RRB- Plan EmployerInformation - What is a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan ? Its a great benefit to both your employees and you!A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan is a tax-deferred plan that can be set up forany public school , university , college or non-profit 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- organization . Generally , any employee may participate as away to invest for retirement . A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan benefits more than just your employeesIt benefits your organization . Help reward and retain loyal employees while attractingnew , well-qualified ones . Maintain a positive work environment and enhance yourreputation as a progressive , caring organization , with littlecost to you . It benefits you in your goal to prepare for yourown retirement . You will have a high-quality plan to build a supplementaryretirement income while saving on taxes today . You have the ability to choose from a wide variety ofinvestment options to fit your goals . How does a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan work ? Contributions - You and your employees can contribute money on a pre-taxbasis . This means you can afford to contribute more than ifyou put money aside after taxes were deducted . And , unlike ataxable investment , earnings on the account compound taxfree until the money is withdrawn . Then both contributionsand earnings will be treated as taxable income . A pre-taxcontribution of up to $ 17,500 may be made in 2013 . Forthose 50 and older , a catch-up contribution of $ 5,500 maybe made . Additional catch-up contributions may be madeby those with at least 15 years of service with a qualifiedemployer . These limits may increase in future years.You may be able to contribute to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan as well , and double your contributions . For example , in2013 , the maximum contribution to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan is normally $ 17,500 . That can be combined with the403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan normal contribution limit of $ 17,500 for a totalof $ 35,000 invested tax deferred . Catch-up contributions canincrease this combined limit even more . Employer match You may choose to have a plan available for just youremployees to easily contribute money for their retirement.Or , you can go a step further and offer additionalcontributions where you match all or a part of employeecontributions . The plan does not require an employer match , but its a great way to encourage participation and is apowerful tool in attracting and retaining employees . If youchoose to make matching contributions , they do not counttoward the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan limits on employee contributions . Roth option - You may choose to offer a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- option . Under aRoth option , employee contributions are made on an aftertax basis . However , a distribution from a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSAaccount is completely free of federal income tax if it meetsboth of the following requirements : It is made after the end of the five year period that beginswith the year that the employee made his or her first Roth403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSA contribution to your plan . It is made after the employee reaches age 59 , becomesdisabled or dies . Access to account balances-You can select a time period for employees to become fullyvested in the employer-matching portion of the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan.Note that employee contributions are always 100 % vested.Distributions can be made only when participants severemployment , reach age 59 , become permanently disabledor experience financial hardship , or are a reservist called toactive duty for 180 days or more or for an indefinite period.The employer plan may impose additional restrictions . Unless the distributions are rolled over to an eligibleretirement plan , they will be taxed as ordinary income.Distributions before age 59 may also be subject to an IRS10 % penalty tax . Distributions attributable to employercontributions are only allowed on severance of employmentor occurrence of another event as provided by the plan .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
Supplemental Long Term Disability Insurance is Disability Insurance that supplements what is provided by your employer . Group Disability policies usually pay 60 % of the employee 's income , and if the employer pays the premium for the policy , the benefit is taxed , reducing what is paid out to the employee . Supplemental Long Term Disability Insurance can increase this benefit , as well as offer some other features that the group Disability plan does not offer .
This remains an area of great confusion to many small business owners . If you have less than 50 employees the answer is `` No '' . The employer mandate provision of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 100 or more full time employees beginning in 2015 and for employers with 50 to 99 full time employees in 2016 . Please note that when I use the term full time employees this means employees who work 30 + hours per week and also includes what are referred to as full time equivalent employees -LRB- FTEs -RRB- . FTEs are part time employees whose work hours are totaled up according to IRS approved calculations that are then translated into some number of full time employees to be added to the employer 's regular full time employee count to arrive at a total employment figure that may determine whether an employer is subject to the employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act or is eligible to participate in the SHOP -LRB- small business group insurance -RRB- offering -LRB- s -RRB- in the government health insurance marketplaces . Totally simple , right ? Any business owner would be well advised to seek out a knowledgeable health insurance broker/consultant to assist them is making these determinations and explaining the record keeling , tracking and reporting requirements the employer may be subject to under the Affordable Care Act . Getting this stuff wrong could have serious tax implications for the employer . If I can be of any assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me as I am a Chartered Benefit Consultant .
With Key Person disability insurance , if a vital employee becomes disabled , the business will receive disability income to cover the financial loss of the missing employee . And if a business has more than one key employee whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then Key Person disability insurance can be purchased for more than one person in the business . Any business that would find it hard to replace a vital employee needs Key Person disability insurance . Much like the saying , if a business puts all its eggs in the basket of one person , it wont be able to sustain itself should that person become disabled .
I believe what you are referring to is what 's called `` split-dollar '' life insurance . This type of life insurance is generally used for businesses to help an employee purchase coverage - it can be used as a form of deferred compensation or as an incentive for the employee to work at that company . The idea of a split-dollar policy is to share or `` split '' aspects of the program between two parties -LRB- again - generally employer and employee -RRB- , including ownership , premiums , death benefits , cash value , and dividends . The advantages for the employee in doing this type of policy is to get the coverage they need to protect their family , but at a cheaper price . When the employer is paying premiums , the employee may be able to reduce their income tax liability when in higher tax brackets . Upon the death of the employee , the proceeds can be used to provide for estate liquidity . So why would the employer do all of this rather than make the employee buy an individual policy on their own ? In short , tax purposes . While it allows the employer to provide benefits to their employee with low costs , the portion of premiums the employer pays can be deducted for tax purposes . Upon the death of the employee , the employer is paid an amount equal to the sum of premiums paid on behalf of the deceased employee . These plans feature a good amount of flexibility for the employer as well , as they can modify or terminate the program at their discretion .
That depends , an employer can absolutely reimburse their employees for qualified medical expenses but only if they do so in a way that provides an equitable enrichment for all eligible employees . The most common and simple way that a business can structure such a benefit is with a Health Reimbursement Account . The HRA is a way in which a business can raise deductibles and lower the premiums and then reimburse employees for qualified medical expenses as they go . The HRA is a notational account so it does not require the business to set aside funds in a specific account . The major benefit for business would be the opportunity to offer a far more comprehensive benefit plan at a lower cost . The lower cost is first delivered through the substancially lower premiums and then sustained due to the majority of employees medical requirements on average not coming close to maxing out their deductibles , so even though they may make a dent in their deductibles and some employees will satisfy their entire deductibles it will not offset the savings realized on their premiums . The one key is that such a plan is available to all eligible employees and does not discriminate against any group of employees especially the high payed employees .
You may be thinking of the Obamacare requirement that mandates employers provide health insurance for their employees or pay a penalty tax . The employer mandate does not apply to businesses with fewer than 50 full time employees . A full time employee means non-seasonal , W2 classification . Businesses that use seasonal or 1099 employees are exempt as long as their full time employee count is below 50 .
There remains a lot of confusion over this issue in the wake of the passing of the health care reform law -LRB- ObamaCare , the Affordable Care Act -RRB- and justifiably so . Technically speaking , ObamaCare does not force any employer to offer health insurance to their employees , their is no criminal penalty for failure to do so . That point made , the Affordable Care Act consists of a mix of tax incentives and tax penalties to supposedly induce employers to provide health insurance for their employees . First of all , for employers with 2 to49 employees there are no tax penalties at all for failure to provide health insurance to their employees . A tax credit is offered but with enough limitations associated with it that only a tiny percentage of small employers have ever taken advantage of it . For employers who are at and above the 50 full time and/or full time equivalent employee level they will be the ones who will be faced with tax penalties for failing to provide health insurance and/or failing to provide affordable health insurance to their employees . The first employers to be impacted will be those with 100 or more full time employees in 2015 . Then , starting in 2016 , employers in the 50 to 99 employee range will be subject to the same tax penalty . The tax penalty will be $ 2000 per employee per year and will be a non-deductible business expense . Not surprisingly , the situation is more complicated than I have just described but there is not space here to go into all the details involved . Suffice it to say , this is an issue of great concern to many employers , especially ones who have not offered health insurance to their employees or a large segment of their employees in the past . The restaurant , hospitality and trucking industries are some common examples of industries that can expect to be adversely impacted financially by the tax penalty . For consultation on this issue please feel free to contact me .
On Employer sponsored group plans the minimum cost is 50 % of the group rate of the employees , which is usually the median rate of the employees added together . But , the employer can elect to pay more than 50 % , just no less of the employees premiums . Ex . you have 5 employees that have an underwritten group rate of $ 200 per month per employee , or $ 2,400 per year x 5 employees = $ 12,000 x 50 % , which is $ 6,000 per year . But , this does not include coverage for dependents or the tax implications . That is just the bottom line dollar cost , before any adjustments , and does not take into account the type of insurance coverage selected . There are several ways to get employee coverage , this example of a group plan is just the most common .
According to www.irs.gov , $ 50,000 or less of group-term life insurance that is carried directly or indirectly by the employer -LRB- meaning the employer pays for some or all of the life insurance for employees OR arranges for the premiums paid by at least one employee to subsidize the premium for at least one other employee -RRB- , does not have any tax consequences . Life insurance coverage over $ 50,000 that is carried directly or indirectly by the employer , will include on the W2 the amount of the premiums that is taxable to the employee . A policy that is not carried directly or indirectly by the employer has no tax consequences to the employee .
No American employer is required to provide health insurance to their employees . What the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- imposes is an employer mandate that employers of certain sizes must offer their employees health insurance that meets certain minimum essential benefit coverage requirements and an affordability level to the employee . If such an employer chooses not to offer group health insurance to their employees the employer will be subject to an employer mandate tax penalty charged on a per employee basis . In 2015 employers with 100 + employees will be subject to this requirement with the size threshold dropping to 50 + employees in 2016 . Employers with less than 50 employees are not required to offer coverage . While on the face of it the employer mandate would seem to be an incentive for larger employers to offer health insurance to their employees it 's true effects are yet to be seen and are quite debatable . For example , the cost of the tax penalty is generally far less than the cost of insuring an employee thus perhaps creating an incentive to take the lower cost of the tax penalty and to send your employees to the health insurance marketplaces to buy their own coverage .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Long Term Care Insurance A Good Idea ?
Long term care insurance is a good idea if you have an estate to protect . Nursing home costs are very high and you will be required to liquidate assets in order to pay for them . If you have a long term care policy , the policy will pay those costs .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Before buying long term care insurance , it is a good idea to look at the area in which you anticipate you will be living when you reach the age where long term care may be needed , and see what their average rates for assisted living and nursing home care run . Talk to your family and get their ideas on arrangements if that type of care was needed . Review your budget and determine how much you have to spend on long term care , and tell that to your agent when you start . An agent can save you a lot of time and frustration from looking at all kinds of bells and whistles that you can not afford , when they know your budget from the start . These are some things that will help your long term care search start off on a good foot .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Is long term insurance a good buy ? Well it all depends on your needs and your assets . The big thing long term care does is provide you a pool of money to help you choose what you want to have happen regarding your care . Without long term care coverage any situation that comes up where you need care , you 'll be faced with where ever will take you and quite possibly a reduction in assets to cover the cost . The idea of long term care being a good buy is strictly in the eye of the beholder . For some it does n't matter and for others it is just a matter of plugging in the right variables to make the plan work best .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
In addition to the two excellent reasons Neil gave , I would add that a young person might want to buy Long Term Care insurance if you have a family history of rheumatoid arthritis , multiple sclerosis , diabetes , or other health conditions that increase the chances of needing long term care in the future . It is nearly impossible to get long term care insurance after being diagnosed with some diseases . Getting the coverage while you can is a good idea with any type of insurance that relies on medical underwriting , as Long Term Care insurance does .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
The amount of monthly or daily benefit that you buy in long term care insurance depends on assets that you have to go towards long term care insurance costs and the rates at long term care facilities in your area . You can get a good idea of average rates by contacting a few facilities to know roughly what they charge in your area .
A good time to buy Long Term Care insurance is before you have a serious health condition . LTC rates are based on health , especially the type of ailments that are more common among older people , such as crippling arthritis or stroke . Since the chances of one 's health deteriorating greatly increases in one 's 50 's and 60 's , it is a good idea to purchase Long Term Care Insurance in one 's 50 's , while you can lock in a good rate .
What do annuities invest in ? Well the easiest way to find out is to review the insurance company 's financial statements . This will give you a good idea of where they look to gain returns from . Usually insurance companies are risk adverse with their investment choices and tend to look for long term investments . This is also a reason they have attached such a long surrender window on annuities . The idea is to invest long term for annuities , rather than short term .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Which Health Insurance Is Best ?
What health insurance is the best for you ? This question is asked daily so I 'll answer it accurately and quite briefly . It depends on various factors , including your age , your zip code , the type of plan you want or need , and your household income . A licensed broker can quickly compare plans and maximize your subsidy so you are paying the lowest prices .
The best health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between which plan is going to offer you the most comprehensive coverage and which plan is most suitable for your needs and budget . In short , it 's different for everyone . Under the Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may also want to see if group coverage is available through your employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or your employment was terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go . I would advise consulting with an experienced health insurance broker regarding your specific situation so you can review a wide range of options - an experienced broker can help you determine the plan that will best serve your needs and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much !
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
There 's no one company that 's necessarily `` the best '' health insurance company.United Health Group -LRB- includes United Healthcare -RRB- is the biggest health insurance company in the United States.Wellpoint -LRB- includes Anthem -RRB- Kaiser , Aetna , Cigna , Coventry , and CareFirst are some of the other big name insurance companies in the country . However , not every company offers health plans in every state . The best kind of health insurance to get is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Under the new Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels of coverage - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or were fired , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go . Because everyone 's needs and budgets are different as well as the plan types available to them , the best thing you can do is talk to an experienced health insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level and review your specific needs and wants regarding your coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
The answer has two distinct parts to it . Part One : You can only purchase life insurance on someone you have an `` insurable interest '' in . This means you have some financial interest in them continuing to live . Such as a spouse , a child , a business associate , or some relative with whom you may be in some manner financially associated with . Part Two : Not everyone can have life insurance , except for the `` Guaranteed '' type insurance , which is for relatively low amounts of death benefit , and a relatively high premium . This may come through a group plan or a general advertisement.For the other types of life insurance , your health will be checked , unless you are a member of a group doing open enrollment , where the premiums are averaged out among sick and healthy members . After a health check , the company will make an offer of what they will charge and what death benefit they will offer . You may not get what you hoped for . Your best bet is to do everything you can to make sure your health exam will find you in the best health possible . Do not lie . They will find out . The company with the lowest rate is not always the one with the best coverage . Keep the reputation of the company in mind . Always best to go with the best life insurance company you can find who will cover you . Gary Lane 9497972424 .
If you go to a website that offers free , instant life insurance quotes from multiple companies , you can enter some factors -LRB- date of birth , gender , term length , face amount , etc -RRB- and see which life insurance companies have the lowest quotes . If there were no questions about build or health , you are most likely viewing quotes for the best rate class , which may not be the class you qualify for . But that exercise does give you an idea of which companies offer the cheapest rates for term insurance for those in perfect health . Keep in mind that being overweight , having a health condition , or being older will probably result in other companies offering the cheapest rates . To find the lowest priced term life insurance rates for you , it is best to call an agent so that they can gather all these variables and do the shopping for you .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
How do you get the best insurance rates ? Well , be in the best possible health you can be . Your price you pay for life insurance is simply related to your overall health and health history . Insurance companies create rate classes in which they lay out exactly what health requirements are needed for the insured to get that price . Where you fall into a class health wise , determines your price .
The best life insurance to purchase is that which you can afford and which best meets your particular needs . If the premium is so high that you can not afford to pay it when the first car repair comes along , then that is not the best policy for you . If you are a healthy 70 year old buying 10 year Term life insurance to pay for your funeral , that is not the best policy for you . Visiting with a professional life insurance representative will help you find the best life insurance to purchase . Unfortunately , there is no other good answer , but the good news is that if you do n't like talking to insurance agents , you can do it by phone or email .
You can get health insurance online in Texas ! The easiest and most efficient way to obtain the best rates and best coverage is through an experienced broker . That 's our job and why we have top-rated websites . The . gov website is still not free from glitches , delays and security concerns . And most experienced health insurance brokers can offer `` off-Exchange '' plans which you can not get through the government website . A broker will help determine the amount of your federal subsidy , so you can view how much your Texas health insurance rate will reduce and which options are the best . If you missed Open Enrollment , a broker can review short-term plan options and other viable choices .
Do a quick web search for group health insurance agent or employee benefits to find a local health insurance broker . Web sites such as NetQuote.com and BuyerZone.com can also help connect you with an insurance broker . Generally the group health insurance companies do n't engage in much direct selling , especially to the small & medium sized business marketplace and if you do try to go directly to a group health insurance carrier you must understand they can only talk to you about their products regardless of whether their products are the best fit for your particular needs . Finding a competent , experienced and up-to-date health insurance broker is more important than ever after all the changes to the health insurance environment after the January 1st , 2014 implementation of the latest requirements of the Affordable Care Act . The insurance carriers a layperson might assume would be the best value based upon past exposure may , in fact , be the worst value in our new environment . You need to find an insurance professional who is more than just a shopping service . There are new financing concepts being introduced to help employers mitigate the premium shock caused by the Affordable Care Act and , depending upon the composition and income levels of your work force , group health insurance may not necessarily even be the best solution for your employee benefits platform . For assistance in Tennessee , Arkansas and Mississippi feel free to contact me for advice .
Health Insurance is a Privilege ; it is a privilege to have #healthinsurance which is a benefit in many ways . If an insurance company insures a person in return for a premium paid , the insured person now has the benefit of lower health costs due to agreed upon health tariffs negotiated between the insurance carriers and health providers , in addition , the insured person will only be responsible for a portion of the now lower fees for health services received . In areas of socialized health care , the Government or Employers may be paying the premiums for the same benefits explained above . The outcome is always better when everyone is insured since it lowers the overall ` risk ' taken by the insurance companies ; with better health care , comes better health , lower risk , lower premium and a greater public awareness of the ability to promote better health care options . For more information regarding Health Insurance , you may visit : WEBSITELINK
Asking a life insurance agent how much life insurance costs is like asking a realtor how much a house costs . Which house ? Which life insurance plan ? There are entirely too many variables to answer that question . First is what is the need for life insurance and is there an insurable interest ? In other words , does someone lose financially or become saddled with your debt at your death ? Next are the underwriting questions to determine an accurate quote . We need your sex , age , build , health status , health history , life style , occupation , net worth , residence , and length of term or type of plan . It can vary over 14 rating classes as to which premium class you qualify for . I suggest using an experienced independent life insurance broker to shop the market to find the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
Health insurance is a type of insurance coverage that pays for medical and surgical expenses caused by illness or bodily injury of the insured person . It can be purchased privately , provided by an employer , or , as in the case of Medicaid or Medicare , be provided by the government . Payments for medical services can either be paid by the health insurance company directly to the health care provider , or it can be paid to the insured person to reimburse them for payments made , or a combination of both . There generally is a deductible , which is the amount the insured person must pay for health care received until the insurance plan then starts to pay . And there is usually a co-pay , which is a % of the health care expenses incurred above the deductible , or else is paid for predefined services for which the deductible does not enter in .
Being an agent , I would have to say that your best bet is to work with a health insurance agent . Why ? Because trained , licensed health insurance agents know which carriers have the best prices at any given time , which policies best fit your particular situation - and agents are there to help you before , during and after the sale . I am helping my existing clients on a daily basis . And with Healthcare Reform coming , my clients know they do n't have to worry about a thing - I will be there to help them make the transition .
I suspect you are asking about `` supplementary '' insurance . Secondary insurance is a term associated with when a person is covered under 2 different health insurance policies . Most commonly when a husband and wife both work at different employers and one or both are enrolled in their employer 's health plan and are covering their spouses as dependents . In this situation the two policies will `` coordinate benefits '' and one policy will cover what the other does not . But there is really no `` best '' in this situation , it 's just whatever coverage the other spouse has . Supplementary policies are numerous and varied and are offered by a growing number of insurance carriers . Some supplementary policies are specifically designed to cover health insurance plan deductible and other out-of-pocket expenses . Others can be targeted for specific situations such as cancer and critical illnesses . The sad fact is that there is no objective measure that can tell you what the `` best '' supplementary policy is for your specific situation . Some consumers will associate lots of advertising and the branding of a certain aquatic fowl with being the best . This may or may not be true . Seeking out the advice of an independent health insurance agent would be in your best interest if you are in the market for supplementary coverage . Agents tied to one specific insurance company can only show you that insurance company 's products and so their objective will be to fit your needs into their box whether it 's the best fit for you or not .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Should I Pay For Renters Insurance ?
I just wrote a renters policy and the annual premium was $ 92 / year . While that is on the low side , it does illustrate that the cost of a renters policy is not significant . However the cost of not having a renters policy can be significant . A lawsuit can bankrupts you . A fire can destroy everything that you own . If you are forced to move out you might find that alternative housing is significantly more expensive .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
A renter should have renters insurance to protect your assets , personal property and loss of use . However unless required by a landlord to carry renters insurancethen renters insurance is an option . I recommend you check with your auto insurance provider about obtaining renters insurance policy since in many cases the multi policy discount will off-set the cost of renters insurance .
Most reputable companies offer renters insurance and it 's very reasonably priced . Call your agent who handles your auto insurance and they should be able to help you . And , if they use the same company for your renters , you should get discounts off of both saving you quite a bit of money . Here are some things to consider : Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- , and your liability . Two things to get right : Use a tool to estimate what it would cost to replace your stuff . Notice I said `` replace '' . You can get insurance that would pay you the depreciated value of your stuff but , in my opinion , it 's worth a little bit more to get your stuff replaced with new . Your agent should have a tool to help you or you can use the one on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like the tool -RRB- . Pick a liability limit that will cover all your assets . I usually wo n't go below $ 300,000 and I usually recommend at least $ 500,000 . The price difference is usually below $ 10/yr . It 's well worth it . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust to do the best for you and take their advice . In the long run , you 'll be happy you did .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
Always . And the landlord should request evidence of the existence of the renters insurance . Reason number one : Under the personal liability coverage of a renters policy the carrier agrees to pay the sums the insured is legally liable for as a result of bodily injury or property damage . What type of occurrencescould be involved ? A guest in the renter 's apartment slips on a wet bathroom floor , falls , and is injured . This is bodily injury . The tenant leaves a pan of oil on the stove unattended and a fire results damaging the building . This is property damage . Reason number two : Unless legally liable , the landlord is not responsible for the tenant 's business or personal property -LRB- for things like fire , theft , mysterious disappearance , etc -RRB- The tenant should cover their own property with insurance like a renters policy .
I am not quite sure what your asking , so I will answer this question , which is what I think you asked : `` What are the standard coverages included in a renters policy ? '' The standard coverage in a renters policy includes personal property , liability and medical payments . Personal property can be general property and scheduled property -LRB- i.e. jewelry , cameras , hearing aids -RRB- on premise ; and , sometimes , there can be a sub-limit for personal property off-premise . Liability covers your negligent acts against a third party . Medical payments provides a small sum of money to people who hurt themselves at your rented premise . I hope this answers what you were asking .
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Elective C-Sections ?
Based on my 32 years of experience as a broker , I do not believe that an elective C-Section is covered by a standard individual or private health insurance plan . I am assuming that the normal vaginal delivery was recommended and deemed safe for the expectant mother and the attending physician did NOT recommend the C-Section .
Based on my 32 years of experience as a broker , I do not believe that an elective C-Section is covered by a standard individual or private health insurance plan . I am assuming that the normal vaginal delivery was recommended and deemed safe for the expectant mother and the attending physician did NOT recommend the C-Section .
I would just like to elaborate on the above answer : Coverage is designated by letters and sections , where section one covers property and section two covers liability . SECTION 1 : A - Dwelling B - Other Structures C - Personal Property D - Loss of use SECTION 2 : E - Liability -LRB- negligence must be proven -RRB- F - Medical Payments to others -LRB- no negligence has to be proven -RRB- In later sections will be the additional coverage such as scheduled property , additional causes of loss -LRB- flood , earthquake -RRB- and any scheduled exclusions . I hope this puts the above answer in context of your policy .
Let me add a few comments here on how the coverages are usually presented on a Declaration page of a Homeowners policy . First there is the party being insured and who the company is that is providing the insurance . Then there is a specific term for the coverage to begin and end . Then there are many ways to then itemize the coverage , but here are some basics . The policy is usually divided into two Sections . Section I deals with property insurance and Section II Liability Insurance , so within the section I coverages there are usually four parts Coverages A , B , C , D. Coverage A is the Dwelling Coverage . This can be sold on an Actual cash value basis -LRB- very infrequently , but watch out for it -RRB- usually on a 100 % of the dollar value of the estimated cost to replace the house itself . This is often difficult for consumers to understand , but no one really cares about the market value . What is important is the replacement cost and replacing one house destroyed is usually a lot more expensive then building one new in a subdivision . Make sure you have enough coverage . This is not an exact science so many companies offer extensions to increase the coverage beyond the stated value . Next is Coverage B : These are the other structures appurtenant , outbuildings , fences , Gazebos unattached garages etc. . Coverage C is usually Personal Property or Contents Coverage . This is very important to understand : You want replacement cost coverage not Actual Cash Value , ACV . The easiest way to think of this is the ten your old large and 200 lb TV . The ACV is going to be next to nothing . There is no continuing interest in buying that type TV anywhere . But replacing it with a new TV with light weight plasma features is what you want . Coverage D is Additional Living Expense . This can be stated two different ways or a mixture of the two . Some companies list a maximum dollar limit available . Others list a maximum time limit and still others list a maximum time limit and dollar limit . This covers the additional cost of living elsewhere while your home is reconstructed . It can also come into play if a Governmental authority wo n't let you near your home for safety reasons -LRB- i.e. forced evacuation form an impending hurricane -RRB- . This coverage does not pick up the cost of things you would normally pay out of pocket , but the additional things and costs necessary to keep your household going while your home is repaired . The next set of coverages comprise Section II or liability coverage . Coverage E is very broad and covers such things as an injury to a child by your dog , or an inadvertent collapse of you deck with guests on it etc. . Coverage E then is is sold in increments of 100,000 usually . The difference in price from say 300,000 to 500,000 is usually only a few dollars a year . If you have an umbrella policy , you may be required to carry a minimum of 500,000 in coverage . Coverage F is Medical payments coverage . This is usually quite nominal and is used to cover minor incidents where fault may not be much of an issue , but you feel obliged to pay for the medical bill . For example a neighbor picks up your mail for you while you are gone and trips on your garden hose . The injuries are not serious , but do require a couple stitches . The limit is low because the much more serious incidents would require negligence or absolute liability and would fall under Coverage E. I hope this helps . If you are in AZ.CA , TX , MO , or GA we 'll be glad to assist you with placing your homeowners coverage .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
A qualified beneficiary must notify the plan administrator of a qualifying event within 60 days after divorce or legal separation or a child 's ceasing to be covered as a dependent under plan rules . Plan participants and beneficiaries generally must be sent an election notice not later than 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred . The individual then has 60 days to decide whether to elect COBRA continuation coverage . The person has 45 days after electing coverage to pay the initial premium . Qualified beneficiaries must be given an election period during which each qualified beneficiary may choose whether to elect COBRA coverage . Each qualified beneficiary may independently elect COBRA coverage . A covered employee or the covered employee 's spouse may elect COBRA coverage on behalf of all other qualified beneficiaries . A parent or legal guardian may elect on behalf of a minor child . Qualified beneficiaries must be given at least 60 days for the election . This period is measured from the later of the coverage loss date or the date the COBRA election notice is provided by the employer or plan administrator . The election notice must be provided in person or by first class mail within 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred .
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
There is no part of Medicare titled Part T. Medicare consists of 4 main parts - A , B , C , and D . There are also 10 Medigap plans -LRB- a.k.a. Medicare supplement plans -RRB- - A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Are you perhaps referring to your Medicare claim number ? Your claim number is your social security number plus a letter . The letter T is one of the common ending characters to a claim number . If you have a claim number ending in `` T '' , it designates that you are either uninsured , but entitled to Part A or are fully insured and have elected to only take Part A. I hope that answers your question . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
Dependent children are eligible to be covered under their parent 's health insurance plan up to age 26 . Regarding dropping a dependent from your health insurance coverage , itwill depend upon whether you have an individual health insurance policy or whether you are covered under a group health insurance policy that includes a Section 125 plan . If you have an individual policy then it should be a simple matter of contacting your agent or the health insurance carrier and notifying them of your intention to drop the dependent child from your coverage . It is most likely that you will need to complete and sign a termination request form so that all the legalities associated with terminating a person 's coverage are complied with . If you are covering your dependent under your group health insurance coverage through your employer and they have a Section 125 plan in place your situation will be more complicated . If you do n't know what a Section 125 plan is , if you are paying any portion of your health insurance premium and it is being taken out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis then you are almost certainly subject to a Section 125 plan . Check with your HR person , the business owner or their insurance broker to get a definitive answer to this issue . Under IRS regulations because you are enjoying the advantages of pre-tax treatment for your share of your health insurance costs this advantage comes with some strings attached regarding the employee 's ability to change their coverage outside of the group 's normal open enrollment period . Essentially you have to have what is called a `` Change of Life Status Event '' to change your coverage status outside of open enrollment time . These are specific events such as marriage , divorce , adoption , losing coverage that you had elsewhere and a few other circumstances . Just getting mad at your 23 year old son who wo n't get off the couch and plays X-Box all day -LRB- while certainly a problem -RRB- does not meet the criteria of a change of life status event and you would not be able to drop them from your coverage until your group 's next open enrollment .
A profit sharing plan falls under IRS section 401 . Both a profit sharing plan and 401k are forms of retirement plans that allow employees to make pre-tax contributions to an account where contributions and earnings are not taxed until they are pulled out during the distribution phase . It is important to note that a profit sharing plan does not have to be part of a retirement plan . A profit sharing plan typically allows the employer to decide from year-to-year whether to contribute on behalf of participants . It would make sense that this decision follows the company 's profitability for the previous year . While there are variations of both types of retirement plans , there are many similarities between profit sharing plans and 401k 's such as the ability to take out a loan or pull money out based on a narrow definition of hardship . Both can have non-elective employer contributions . An employer can offer both a profit sharing plan and a 401k . You might find this link to an IRS publication helpful regarding profit sharing plans . WEBSITELINK
A renters policy normally has four sections . The first section is personal property . This section promises to provide either like items or new items for those damaged by a covered peril , such as fire . The second section is called incidental property coverages which include things like emergency removal of your property from the rental unit to prevent loss from a covered peril , fire department service charges , debris removal , credit card , forgery and additional coverages . The third section is personal liability and provides for your defense and damages up to the limits of the policy for personal injury and property damage lawsuits . The last section is incidental liability and provides limited coverage to property of others damaged by you . There are other coverages built into the package .
The answer to your question depends upon three key factors . Many disability policies cover maternity leave , but many more do not . First , the policy has to cover normal childbirth . Policies sold through work site groups generally cover childbirth , while those sold directly do not . Second , you have to start the policy prior to conception rather than after . Third , the policy elimination period has to be very short . The standard benefit period for a normal delivery is six weeks , or eight weeks for C-section . If your elimination period is longer than two months , then no benefits are paid .
Homeowners Insurance can cover injuries sustained on the property . There are two sections to the homeowners insurance policy . Section I is the property section and covers Dwelling , other structures , personal property & loss of use coverage . Section II of a homeowners insurance policy covers liability - namely Personal Liability & Medical Payments . The medical payments section is designed to cover injuries that are not the policy owns fault . I usually use an example . . so here it is , `` if you are over my house on Thanksgiving and you are cutting my turkey with my knife and you cut yourself coverage can be afforded under the policy . '' In this case there was no negligence on my part but you did sustain injuries . We assuming there was nothing wrong with the floor to cause you to slip and the knife was functioning correctly . Keep in mind that every policy is different and I suggest you check with your local independent agent for coverage information that is specific to your policy . Hope this helps .
Any woman who is planning a pregnancy should purchase short term disability insurance prior to conception . Most policies offered by payroll deduction at the work site cover mom 's recovery from normal childbirth . A vaginal delivery qualifies for s six week benefit payment , and c-section delivery qualifies for eight weeks - after meeting the policy elimination period . Half of all women need to leave work prior to delivery because of complications . Plus accidents and illnesses may be covered as well .
To protect yourself and your family against the financial risk of illness or injury and to finance necessary preventive health care needs . If you are a billionaire you can disregard this advice . If you are a regular American then you disregard it at your own peril . Health care is expensive . I had to answer this question recently for some people who had immigrated to the U.S.A. , were rather young to early middle aged and who had n't had occasion to use much health care in our country yet . So here are a few ball park figures I gave them from a report from 2012 . The average cost of an appendectomy is around $ 13,300 . The average cost of a day in the hospital is over $ 3400 . A normal child birth runs around $ 8000 and a C-section birth can be in the $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 range . And this is just normal run of the mill life events most people will experience at some time . My late cousin lost his 7-year battle with prostate cancer and while he participated in a lot of experimental programs as M.D. Anderson that were either free of heavily subsidized we still loosely estimated that his medical costs that he could track over that period were well in excess of $ 2 million . My niece delivered a premature child at 26 weeks and the child spent another 6 + months in neonatal intensive care , they 've crossed the $ 1 million dollar threshold and the meter is still running as their child will probably require some level of treatment for the rest of his life . Oh , and you need to have health insurance to protect yourself against the individual mandate tax penalty included in ObamaCare . Which in 2015 will be $ 325 or 2 % of your income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- and that will steadily increase in following years . Hopefully this will help answer your question as to why someone would need health insurance .
Medigap plan C covers essentially everything included in Medigap plan F. Plan C covers your Medicare Part A and Part B deductibles and coinsurance , benefits for SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- and foreign travel . Plan C does not cover Medicare excess charges . Very few carriers offer plan C and I have not found it to be competitive in Georgia .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Does Long Term Care Insurance Not Cover ?
Long-term care insurance benefits do not cover acute medical problems , but rather addresses chronic medical situations . Acute medical problems would include such things as a broken arm or abdominal surgery . Major medical , Medicare , and Medicaid would be sources of insurance coverage for those events . Chronic medical problems involve conditionsfrom whicha person is not likely to ever recover . Such conditions might include multiple sclerosis , Alzheimer 's disease , osteoporosis , or auto-immune diseases . Just having a chronic disease or condition does not necessarily trigger the payment of benefits from a long-term care policy , however . One must be medically certified by a health care professional that there is an inability to perform at least two of six specified daily activities -LRB- such as getting dressed , feeding oneself , etc. -RRB- , or having been diagnosed with a cognitive impairment . Long-term care insurance will not pay for medical costs of a chronic condition if a person can successfully get around and take care of themselves .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Get Health Insurance With A Pre Existing Condition In New Hampshire ?
Under the Afforable Care Act , you can not be declined for health insurance due to a pre-existing condition or other health-related issue . You have the option to secure a bronze , silver , gold , or platinum level plan - please note , not every carrier offers a plan under each level -LRB- e.g. company XYZ may only offer bronze , silver , and gold plans , but not platinum plans -RRB- . Individuals under age 30 also have the option of securing a catastrophic plan . If you qualify for a subsidy , you would want to look into plans ON the health insurance exchanges . If you do n't qualify for one , you may want to look into plans OFF the exchanges as you will generally have more options available to you . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker if you 're looking for coverage or want to review your existing insurance to see if a better option is available . Insurance brokers have an in-depth knowledge of products from many different carriers and can help you determine the plan that 's going to best serve your needs and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Taxed depends a lot on what exactly is going on . Death benefits are not taxed for income purposes -LRB- as is the case with the majority of policies in all states -RRB- . And New Hampshire has no estate tax . Distributions from a life insurance policy that are not a return of basis are recognized as income , but since New Hampshire does not have an income tax , there would be no income tax due on those distributions .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
As of January 1 , 2014 all major medical insurance plans , both individual and group , can no longer have any exclusions , limitations or waiting periods for pre-existing health conditions . So , from that perspective it is not a matter of which health insurance accepts pre-existing conditions . Any health insurance plan in compliance with the Affordable Care Act has to . Now , there are Short Term Major Medical policies and some limited benefit and/or indemnity type policies out there that can still apply underwriting and can limit or exclude pre-existing conditions but these are not major medical health insurance plans that meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . In some instances people are marketing these types of products as a low cost alternative to ACA compliant health insurance plans . They provide you with some degree of financial protection but they will not shield you from the Individual Mandate tax penalty or provide you with comprehensive coverage . If you are offered a policy that does not cover pre-existing conditions that is a red flag that someone is trying to sell you a non-compliant policy - BUYER BEWARE .
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
Any true major medical insurance policy , group or individual , should cover treatment for Lupus as it is an autoimmune disease in the same class as arthritis . Perhaps a person who was issued an individual health insurance policy that was grandfathered under the terms of the health care reform law was issued coverage excluding Lupus as a condition of issuing the coverage but that 's about the only context I can think of where this question could arise . Certainly in the era of health care reform , especially after January 1 , 2014 , coverage for conditions such as Lupus should not be a big point of discussion . No policy issued after that date can have pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . That being said , how treatment for conditions such as Lupus are handled from a level of coverage perspective can and do vary from one insurance carrier to the next . First of all , your perception of coverage may be affected by the type of policy you have enrolled in . If you enrolled in a policy with a $ 6000 deductible then your perception might be that your condition is n't being covered when actually it is but you are n't seeing any benefits until you 've met your deductible . In other cases your insurance carrier may have treatment protocols in place that guide your physician on the methods of treatment and types of medications that must be adhered to for treatment of such a condition and these may be a departure from your past experience and usage . If you are covered under a non-compliant health plan , possibly a limited benefit or indemnity type plan , then it is quite likely you would have little or no coverage for Lupus or be subject to pre-existing condition exclusions and/or waiting periods . Short Term Medical policies , which by nature do not cover pre-existing conditions , are also another possible area where a person could find that Lupus would not be covered . But , in today 's environment , a person suffering from Lupus can get major medical coverage that covers their condition .
Health insurance rates are rising and will be continuing to rise for several reasons ; 1 -RRB- Healthcare costs are rising -LRB- physician services , prescription drugs , inpatient services -RRB- 2 -RRB- An aging population - the Baby Boom generation , the largest demographic segment of our population , have now aged to the point where they are in the prime years of life -LRB- age 40 + -RRB- that health problems begin to become common . 3 -RRB- Increased consumption of health care services in general - across the board , the American population in general is consuming more and a broader array of health care services than past generations . 4 -RRB- New treatments - from expensive new prescription drugs to new forms of technology like robotic surgery we have a wide range of advances in medical science that allow for the treatment of conditions that in the past there were little or no options available . Few of these new advances are cheap . 5 -RRB- New Conditions - from Autisim , to Celiac Sprue Disease to a variety of other conditions , we can diagnose and treat a range of conditions that were n't even recognized as existing in previous decades . 6 -RRB- Cost Shifting to Cover the Cost of Treating the Uninsured - the cost of providing care for the uninsured who can not pay their own medical bills is shifted over to higher costs for people who are insured . 7 -RRB- Cost Shifting to Cover Government Underpayment for Medicaid and Medicare - since the inception of these government programs in the 1960 's they have never paid the market rate for health care services and in many situations they pay less than the cost of the services these populations consume . This cost difference has also been shifted over to the insured population . 8 -RRB- Government Intervention in the Health Insurance System - with the passage of the Affordable Care Act and the many changes it imposes on health insurance benefits and the financing of health insurance such as doing away with pre-existing condition limitations & exclusions , making policies guaranteed to be issued regardless of health condition , mandating a broad new range of services be covered by all health insurance policies -LRB- for example all policies must cover maternity and pediatric dental and vision services even if you are a 50 year old single male -RRB- , providing subsidies for the purchase of heath insurance up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level and expanding Medicaid eligibility in many states are all factors that will contribute to increased demand for a finite resource . Regardless of one 's political or philosophical views of these changes , basic economics teaches us that higher demand for something for which there is a limited supply leads to higher prices . There are more factors that contribute to the ever increasing cost of health insurance but these are among the main driving forces behind the steady increase in health insurance rates people have been experiencing .
That is a great question ! Car insurance is required in almost every State in America . Even in the ones that do n't , you have to be able to prove that you can pay for damages caused in an accident . If you are looking for the state with the least requirements , it used to be New Hampshire , but that may have changed since I lived out east . It is safe to say that it is required almost everywhere that you can go . It makes sense to have it , and can be devastating to you if you do n't . Thanks for asking !
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
Life insurance is usually not charge income tax in New Hampshire or any other state . The face amount of the policy is income tax free when passed to a beneficiary who is a person , charity , trust , or other entity . It can be charged income tax if passed to the estate .
Virginia does not require you to carry car insurance as long as you pay an uninsured motor vehicle fee to the state . New Hampshire and Mississippi will offer vehicle owners the option to post a cash bond . All other states will require you to maintain auto insurance to operate a motor vehicle on the roadways .
The federal govt . does not require auto insurance . Auto insurance is regulated at the state level . With the exception of the state of New Hampshire , every state has at least a state minimum liability coverage requirement . Some states also require medical coverage -LRB- aka PIP -RRB- , and some states require uninsured motorist coverage as well .
Life insurance proceeds are generally not taxable in New Hampshire unless they are left to the estate . If the beneficiary is the estate , or the death benefit goes to the estate because no beneficiaries are alive , the proceeds will be charged taxes and fees along with all the property in the estate . Federal estate taxes do apply to life insurance proceeds if over the exempted amount of $ 5,250,000 -LRB- in 2013 -RRB- . There are no state inheritance or estate taxes in New Hampshire .
Yes . Pre-existing health conditions such as Lupus can no longer be subject to a pre-existing condition exclusion , waiting period or be the cause for declining to cover a person . Now comes the part where I may part company with some of my peers . Unless you know a lot about health insurance and all the ins and outs of what the Affordable Care Act has caused insurance companies to do in redesigning their products , provider networks and prescription formularies , do n't go to Healthcare.gov for anything more than a cursory examination of what your options might be in the government marketplace and whether you will qualify for any subsidies . You can get a reasonable estimate of these factors without having to set up an account on Healthcare.gov through web sites such as HealthSherpa.com . Persons with chronic diseases , such as Lupus , especially need the services of an experienced health insurance broker who knows the intricacies of the health insurance products sold both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplace . It is not enough to just see that a particular health insurance carrier is available in the government marketplace and your decision should not be guided solely by the monthly premium . The person with a chronic health condition generally has existing relationships with primary and specialty care providers and may have already gone through a lengthy process of finding the correct medication -LRB- s -RRB- and services for the treatment of their condition . They may even want or require access to medical facilities and providers outside of their immediate area . YOU CAN NOT TAKE FOR GRANTED THAT ALL INSURANCE CARRIERS AND THEIR PRODUCTS , ESPECIALLY THOSE SOLD WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE , WILL HAVE YOUR PHYSICIANS OR FACILITIES AS IN-NETWORK PROVIDERS OR THAT YOUR MEDICATIONS WILL BE COVERED UNDER THEIR FORMULARY . Also , access to major centers of excellence like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic , Memorial Sloan-Kettering and others certainly can not be assumed . This is a major issue especially among health plans sold in the government marketplaces where positioning your product based upon price point is key to marketing success . One of the ways that some carriers have achieved this price point positioning is through the use of so called `` skinny '' networks . Which , as their name implies , offer a reduced selection of providers and often a much more stringent and restrictive list of approved medications . Before you enroll in any health insurance plan you need to confirm with both the insurance carrier and the heath care provider -LRB- s -RRB- that all or at least as many as possible of the pieces of your care system are going to be available to you . You also need to confirm in what manner they will be available to you . Can you continue to go directly to the specialists you have been using or must you have a referral from your primary care physician before you can access that specialist now ? Will your current medication arrangement be honored or will you have to reinvent the wheel by going through a step therapy process of using other medications and having unsatisfactory results before your current medication is approved by the new carrier ? What if you have been going to a center of excellence facility out of town once a year for follow-up exams and treatment , will the new carrier allow this ? These are just some of the crucial questions any person suffering from a chronic disease needs to ask and get answered before they choose a health plan in the era of the Affordable Care Act .
New Hampshire does not require you to have auto insurance . However , you are required , by law , to meet the Motor Vehicle Financial Responsibility Requirements . If you can no meet these requirements , your license may be suspended . Sufficient funds must be available in case you have an accident that is your fault . The requirements are $ 25,000 per person , $ 50,000 per accident and an additional $ 25,000 of property damage . $ 1,000 of medical payments coverage is required if the vehicle is for personal use . Most persons purchase car insurance policies . An experienced broker will provide the lowest available rates for you in New Hampshire from the best carriers .
Private health insurance covers pre-existing conditions ... most of the time ! I 'll explain : When applying for coverage during Open Enrollment -LRB- assuming it is a qualified Exchange or Off-Exchange plan -RRB- , pre-existing conditions are covered and there will be no waiting period or surcharge applied . As an experienced health insurance broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , this issue is often discussed with customers and on our top-ranked websites . However , non-compliant plans , such as short-term policies , do not cover pre-existing conditions . If you miss Open Enrollment , these temporary plans are popular options .
Pre-Existing Conditions are no longer an issue . The issue is now Open Enrollment . Let me explain . The Affordable Care Act made pre-existing conditions obsolete ; you can get health insurance no matter what condition you may have . However , you must buy health insurance during open enrollment , which ended April 15th . Now you ca n't get individual health insurance until January 1 , 2015 -LRB- open enrollment starts again November 15th -RRB- . There are certain exceptions that will allow you to get health insurance outside open enrollment such as the loss of employer coverage , marriage , divorce , etc. .
No and yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- anyone applying for major medical health insurance coverage after January 1 , 2014 can not be denied coverage for a pre-existing health condition . Insurance coverage is guaranteed to be issued and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately . However , this does require that you enroll for individual health insurance coverage during the mandated open enrollment period which for 2014 ended on March 31st . If you failed to enroll during the open enrollment period then you can not apply for major medical insurance coverage until the next open enrollment period which begins on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . The only exceptions to this part of the law are for what are referred to as `` Change of Life Status Events '' such as marriage , divorce , losing other health insurance coverage , or having or adopting a child -LRB- as the most common examples -RRB- . For the remainder of 2014 the only options available to persons who failed to enroll during the open enrollment period would be Short Term Medical insurance or perhaps a limited benefit/indemnity policy . However , these policies do still have some underwriting question associated with them that could result in your being declined for coverage . Also , these types of health plans do not cover pre-existing health conditions and do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for being major medical coverage . Therefore , you would be subject to the individual mandate tax penalty even if you do take out one of these types of policies .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
That depends entirely upon what the pre-existing condition is and it 's likelihood of causing a person to become disabled . Something like common allergies would technically be a pre-existing condition but just because you may need allergy shots it is highly unlikely that such a condition would be an issue . Now , if you 've had a mild stroke and have a family history of heart disease then you are in a situation where qualifying for disability insurance would be much more difficult , if not impossible , in the individual market . Some disability insurance carriers will issue coverage that might exclude coverage if the disability is a result of the pre-existing condition . And some employer groups offer group disability coverage to their employees that may be guaranteed to be issued as least up to certain levels of financial coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Cash Out Of A Life Insurance Policy ?
Yes , if the life insurance has cash value -LRB- such as Whole Life or Universal Life -RRB- you can surrender the policy for cash value . In the first years of the policy there will be a surrender charge that comes out of the cash value . In Term life , there is no cash value so you simply drop the policy by stopping payments .
You can only cash out life insurance that has a cash value build-up . Permanent life insurance programs -LRB- including both universal and whole life policies -RRB- bulid cash value - term insurance programs do not build cash value . If you 're looking to cash out your policy , there are a number of things to consider before deciding whether to cash out any life insurance policy . One of the things that most people do n't think about is their insurability , especially when they have an existing plan . They may have preferred rates at the time they got it , but are now being treated for some medical conditions -LRB- heart issues , diabetes , cancer , etc. -RRB- and may be looking at standard or substandard rates on a new plan if they decided to get coverage again later on . If you 're looking at securing new coverage / replacing the old policy , you should compare the two structures and make sure it 's the most favorable course of action for you . Another item to review on the policy before cashing out is whether there are still any surrender charges on the policy and whether there would be any taxable gains -LRB- the cash value is greater than the sum total of premiums paid into the policy -RRB- - these 2 items can affect how much money you actually receive if you cashed out the policy . I highly recommend consulting with an experienced insurance broker who can review all of these points and others with you so you can make sure it 's an optimal move for you . After all things considered and you still want to cash out the policy , you can call the carrier/contact your agent and tell them you want to terminate the coverage -LRB- the amount you receive would be less any surrender charges or loan fees , if applicable -RRB- and they 'll send you the necessary paperwork Depending on the size of the cash out , an option to consider would be putting the money into an annuity to guarantee an income for the rest of your life -LRB- or for a fixed number of years -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Your Life Insurance policy will have the specifics of the `` Grace Period '' that provides and cushion for you when you miss a payment . Life Insurance companies usually want youto keep you policy . Their Grace Period is usually 30 to 60 days depending on the policy and the company . The type of policy will make a difference as well . A Term Life Insurance policy does not have any `` Cash Value '' or a side account that can grow at an interest rate like a savings account and cover the missed premium . This `` Cash Value '' is a feature of a Universal Life policy . The Term Life policy would be in danger of lapsing much quicker and you are probably going to cancelled quicker . A Universal Life policy with cash value is going to use the saving portion to pay the premium . The Universal Life will lapse once the cash value is depleted and the grace period expires . You can call your agent or Life Insurance company and work out options on the Universal Life policy such as lower the `` Face Amount '' or amount of death benefit to help you make the policy last longer . `` Whole Life Insurance '' will have a grace period as well . Coverage options beyond the grace period become more complicated . This Whole Life policy also has a `` Cash Value '' or savings portion as well . You will be subject to the policy 's `` Non Forfeiture Options '' within the policy . These options are different for each policy . You will have to check your policy . Usually , there are 3 options : Return of the cash value to you minus any loans you took out , you can change to a lower amount of insurance that is `` Paid Up '' or you do not have to pay premiums for the amount of death benefit , or you can change to a `` Term Life Insurance '' policy for a specific period of time then the insurance stops .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Whole life insurance has many advantages to it . The first being that your premiums are fixed and guaranteed for the rest of your life and as a permanent insurance program , it builds cash value over time . If it 's a participating whole life policy , any dividends that are paid out can be used to either increase the death benefit via paid up additions , reduce your premium , or make a payment to you directly -LRB- options depend on which carriers whole life policy you have -RRB- . If you use the dividends to reduce the premium , the policy can become self-sustaining after a number of years - meaning no more premium payments . Non-participating policies only build cash value - these types of plans do not pay out dividends . If you 're buying whole life coverage when you 're young and its cash value builds for years and years , it can create a nice nest egg for funds that can be used during your retirement years . It 's important to remember that if you borrow from an insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the monies are expected to be paid back . If you cash out the policy , you lose the life insurance coverage . An alternative for those who are not very concerned about the cash value and want to maximize the death benefit of your life insurance , you may want to consider a guaranteed universal life policy instead of whole life . GULs can offer a larger amount of coverage than whole life policies for the same premium or save you a ton of money on your premiums for a given level of coverage . Make sure to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can create a structure that will best serve your needs , goals , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you are determined to get out of your variable life insurance policy , you should first figure out if there is any cash value there for you . If there appears to be decent cash value in the policy , you can have an as-is illustration run to see how long the policy will last in its ' current configuration with no further premiums . You can get this illustration by calling the customer service phone number for your insurance company . You can use the cash value in a `` 1035 exchange '' for another policy . I 've often found that the cash value from an older policy can fund a new policy at the same or similar death benefit without any further premiums . It costs nothing to find out and you could maintain life insurance coverage without any further expense to you for the rest of your life . You can stop all premium payments and the policy will eventually lapse . The other option is to simply pull the cash value out and keep it . Consulting an independent life insurance agent who can assist in this process is probably a good idea .
With Term life insurance , if you stop paying premiums for over one month , the policy will lapse . To get that same policy back you have to fill out a reinstatement application saying that your health has not changed , and you have to pay back premiums to when you quit paying them . If your health has changed or you are unable/unwilling to pay that amount , you will need to apply for a new policy . There is no cash value and no surrender charge . When you stop paying the premium for cash value product such as Whole life or Universal life , the cash in the policy may pay the premiums until the cash value runs out . If you would rather take the cash value out in cash , or roll it over into another policy , or change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , you must contact your agent or the life insurance company and give them those instructions .
Life insurance has cash value under the circumstances below . The thing is that depending on how you manage that cash , it can be a blessing or a curse . Whole life has cash value when the company pays dividends . These are not guaranteed , but are typically paid . Over time , they can add up . But once you use that tempting loan provision , that cash value not only goes down but so does the death benefit . Better make sure you can deal with that . Universal life has cash value when the company applies a high enough interest rate to the policy account . That can be higher than a lot of conservative instruments out there . But you can take cash out of the policy . And , you can stop paying premiums , or under pay , if you want . What do you think will happen if the interest rate goes down and you deplete the policy of cash ? It will die an ugly death . So be careful .
The cash value is the portion of whole life insurance that has built up so far in your cash account . Think of it like money in the bank . The way whole-life is designed , it has a level premium for the length of the policy or until it is paid off . What 's really happening is as the cash account grows , the actual insured amount reduces by the same amount . You become more and more self-insured each year . If you buy $ 100,000 whole-life policy , in the begining your insured amount is $ 100,000 and your cash value is zero . Many years later your cash value is $ 40,000 and the insured amount is $ 60,000 for a total death benefit of $ 100,000 . Several more years later your cash value is $ 90,000 and the Insured amount is $ 10,000 for a death benefit of $ 100,000 If you live to age that the policy endows -LRB- usually age 95 or 100 on older policies and age 121 on newer ones -RRB- the cash value is $ 100,000 and the insured amount is zero . You are now self insured . You can use the cash value while you are living by taking policy loans which are actually loans against the cash build up in your policy not actually withdrawals from the policy or you can cash surrender the policy and walk away with the cash . If you have a participating policy that pays dividends , you can have additional cash value and death benefit build up from that .
Yes , however , there are a number of things to consider before deciding whether to cash out any life insurance policy . One of the things that most people do n't think about is their insurability , especially when they have an existing plan . They may have preferred rates at the time they got it , but are now being treated for some medical conditions -LRB- heart issues , diabetes , cancer , etc. -RRB- and may be looking at standard or substandard rates on a new plan if they decided to get coverage again later on . If you 're looking at securing new coverage / replacing the old policy , you should compare the two structures and make sure it 's the most favorable course of action for you . Another item to review on the policy before cashing out is whether there are still any surrender charges on the policy and whether there would be any taxable gains -LRB- the cash value is greater than the sum total of premiums paid into the policy -RRB- - these 2 items can affect how much money you actually receive if you cashed out the policy . I highly recommend consulting with an experienced insurance broker who can review all of these points and others with you so you can make sure it 's an optimal move for you . After all things considered and you still want to cash out the policy , you can call the carrier/contact your agent and tell them you want to terminate the coverage -LRB- the amount you receive would be less any surrender charges or loan fees , if applicable -RRB- and they 'll send you the necessary paperwork Depending on the size of the cash out , an option to consider would be putting the money into an annuity to guarantee an income for the rest of your life -LRB- or for a fixed number of years -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
The principal objective of estate planning is to ensure that your property is managed most efficiently during your lifetime and that your wishes are carried out most effectively after you die . Since life insurance creates tax free cash at death it has many applications in Estate Planning . Life insurance can be used to create an estate , to provide cash to take care of your family after you are gone . Life insurance can also be used in estate conservation and estate equalization . Once you have determined your objectives and calculated the need for cash to pay taxes , fees and other costs , nothing delivers cash at death as effectively as life insurance . Another use is estate equalization , in a situation where you want to give a fixed asset to one heir and balance it out with life insurance cash to another . In business situations , life insurance can be used to provide the cash not only to pay taxes and fees , but also to fund a buy sell agreement between partners . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
As David stated , only the owner of the policy can cash in a life insurance policy . It may need to be explained , as well , that not all life insurance polices can be cashed in , because not all life insurance policies have cash value . Even Whole and Universal Life policies usually take time to build up cash value , and Term policies never have cash value unless they have a return of premium feature . So , stated another way , only those who own policies that have cash value , can cash in their life insurance . But they can also borrow from their cash value , and that often is a better way to access the cash in the policy , so as not to give up the death benefit .
Whole Life has set premiums that never go up , guaranteed cash values , and will be around when you need it as long as you pay the premiums . It also has what is called non-forfeiture values . If you stop making payments and the policy has cash value you can : 1 . Let the policy go on extended term which will provide the full face amount for a period until the cash value runs out . 2 . Take a reduced paid up policy for whatever the cash value will buy . 3 . Cash the policy in . Universal Life has Flexible Premiums , you can change the amount you put into the plan . Flexible Death Benefit , you can change the death benefit , reducing it or if your health is good increase the benefit without having to purchase a new policy . Universal Life has a guaranteed interest rate , not guaranteed cash value . Since the premiums are flexible the danger is in under funding the policy which will make the policy lapse , even if you are making premium payments . Universal Life is basically term insurance with a cash value side fund combined into one package . If there is not enough cash in the policy side fund to pay for the term insurance the policy lapses . It is important to make sure you are properly funding the Universal Life policy by paying at least the Target Premium . Each year you will receive an annual statement showing the cost of the term insurance and the amount of cash in the policy . Have your agent review this with you at least every two years to make sure it is performing as planned . As you can see , while the Universal Life has some attractive features , Whole Life is a safer more stable product .
There are several reasons . With cash value life insurance such as whole life , you do not have to worry about prmiums going up as you get older and most likely to need the insurance . The cash value can help provide a buffer if your financial situation changes . Every whole life policy as nonforfiture options in the contract . The cash value can help conserve a poliy utilizing thes options . If you can not afford the premiums any longer the cash value can be used to buy a reduced paid up policy according to a schedule in your policy . You can also stop making payments and the policy will continue in-force with the cash value buying extended term insurance until the cash value is used up . You can cash surrender the policy and get some equity . When you deduct the cash value of a policy from the total premiums you pay you will see that in the long run cash value insurance was far less expensive than buing term . You can also take a loan on your cash value that is very interest friendly and will have no repayment schedule , although it is always best to at least pay the interest since the amount of the loan would be deducted from the face amount when you die .
There are two main types of life insurance . The first is term life insurance which has no cash value . Think of it as renting . The second type of life insurance is cash value life insurance . The most popular go by names like , whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . All of which have cash value that builds with time . If you have one of these types of plans , look for the pages marked `` illustrations '' . You will find a cash value column explaining how much cash is built up in a given year . Most policies allow you to take a `` cash loan '' against them and keep your coverage in force . You may also cash out completely or roll the cash value to another plan . You will find the average policy will not have cash value until coverage has been in force for about 5 years .
Life insurance that can be cashed out is life insurance with a cash value . This is Whole Life or Universal Life , although not every Whole or Universal Life policy has cash value at any given time . Term policies can only be cashed out if they are Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- Term . And you must wait until at least half the term has passed before you can get any cash when surrendering an ROP term policy .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Medicare Pay As You Go ?
Medicare part A which covers medical expenses resulting from hospital services is financed by payroll taxes on workers in employment covered by OASDI -LRB- Old-Age , Survivors , And Disability Insurance -RRB- on a pay as you go basis . Medicare part B which covers partial reimbursement for the cost of physician services , diagnostic tests , ambulance services , prosthetic devices , physical therapy , medical equipment , and home health services is funded primarily through the premiums of those enrolled and is not `` pay as you go '' .
Medicare is funded on a pay as you go system if that is what you mean . The government uses every bit of the Medicare payroll taxes they collect and then borrow more to pay their obligations . This is why Congress is trying to come up with ways to `` save '' Medicare .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
If Medicare did n't exist , health insurance care for seniors would be covered in the same marketplace as the under 65 persons - in short , the private sector . However , the premiums would be substantially higher than what they pay today for Original Medicare and any supplemental coverage programs , including prescriptions -LRB- a big expense -RRB- . During your working life , you 're paying FICA taxes - after you 've hit the 40 quarters mark -LRB- 10 working years -RRB- , your Part A coverage is premium-free . If you had to pay for it out of pocket , it would be $ 426 per month -LRB- in 2014 -RRB- . Your Part B coverage requires a premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -RRB- and you would pay a premium for any supplemental coverage - supplement plans are provided by private insurance companies . The idea of paying taxes all these years for it is so that you 're slowly paying for it in advance so you 're not hit with a massive premium bill in the future that you may not have prepared for . In summary , a senior citizen could end up paying somewhere in the neighborhood of $ 800 + per month per person with everything factored in -LRB- probably higher -RRB- if Medicare did n't exist . As a current or future recipient of Medicare , I bet you 're glad it exists . In the future , however , programs and benefits may have to make changes given the baby boomer generation hitting the retirement ages and going on Medicare - the baby boomer is the largest generation and can create a situation where the funds going out to pay for Medicare are larger than the funds coming in through taxes . Only time will tell on this aspect though . If you have any questions about Medicare supplemental plans , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button or call me at 703-665-9133 .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Medicare excess charges are the difference between what your provider charges and what Medicare pays . This could occur if you go to a doctor that does not accept the Medicare assigned reimbursement amount . Example : You go to a doctor who performs a test for which Medicare pays $ 200 but the Dr charges $ 300 . The excess charge would be $ 100 . However , you can purchase a Medicare Supplement plan which will pay the excess charges .
I am going to answer your question by qualfying what I think you are asking . Under original medicare as long as the doctor is contracted to accept medicare then you can basically go to any doctor . What if you live in Detroit and you prefer to go to a doctor in California ? Medicare is going to want to know why when you live in Detroit and you are seeing a doctor in California . Under the Medicare Advantage Plans you need to understand the terms HMO , PPO , PFFS , in order to assure you are getting the care in `` network '' .
Medicare does not have rebates . Are you asking how much Medicare pays a psychologist ? Or are you asking how much your co-pay is if you go to a psychologist ? If you are on original Medicare you can go to a psychologist . If you have a Medigap plan it will pay all co-pays .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Buy Health Insurance Just For My Child ?
You can buy health insurance for just your child . Rates will be very inexpensive , unless there are major health conditions . Coverage may be limited since many carriers only issue short-term plans on child-only policies . However , beginning in October , Open Enrollment for 2014 plans will begin and many more options will become available . An experienced broker can help you select the best plan at the most affordable price .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Child Riders : I always offer a child rider to parents . Recently -LRB- today -RRB- I added $ 20,000 child rider a mother 's policy . It cost her a whopping $ 8.60 . Not each , but for all 4 children . So the cost per child is $ 2.15 . And if she has more children or adopts they are covered from the 15th day of life with no qualifying . No extra cost . The automatic coverage has meant the difference of being able to cover a child born with a grave illness or not . Which brings up another benefit of most child riders . Guaranteed convertibility of up 5 or 6 times the amount . In the case above when a child reaches age 25 they have the guaranteed right to convert the $ 20,000.00 rider to $ 100,000.00 Permanent plan . No medical questions , no exams , no blood work . At standard rates . That is a huge benefit . We have converted young cancer patients , a Marine in Iraq and a 25 year old that had been in a coma for years to name a few . All for $ 8.60 or $ 2.15 per child . And they can still buy individual policies on the kids . Or use the saved money to buy much more coverage on mom and dad . Individual child policies : I am also a big proponent of short paying a childs policy . Actually just about anyone under 60 that can afford the extra premium . I do not really show cash values on small policies as they take a very long time to grow and normally do not amount to much . Twenty years ago we were selling $ 5,000 Burial and Child plans . While better than nothing , the now grown children are underwhelmed with the face amount or small cash values . Today I am suggesting much larger plans . Not child plans but plans that will be worth more when they are adults and need to protect their own children . $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 or even $ 250,000 plans are not unusual and very reasonable from top rated Insurance Companies . Starting at about $ 20 . As always an experienced Life Insurance Agent is your best source of information . One that has more than one or two companies or types of insurance .
Why buy whole life for a child ? Well I guess I can tell you why I bought whole life for my kids . In no particular order or rank , I bought whole life because that is the cheapest if will ever be , those policies will become cornerstones of their financial lives . Much like buying a piece of property they now have something to build on . They have future guaranteed insurability with these policies as well What that means is they ca n't be told `` no '' by the insurance company , even if they are no longer insurable . Sort of like a stock option . And finally for this post if either of my kids were to die before me I would be devastated . I would be crushed as I have great kids . So insurance on them would help me get through their passing by paying bills that still need to be paid . I am planning for their future living with these policies and accepting the aspect of the possibility of their early passing and the help they would provide . I could never imagine having an argument with a spouse over what headstone to buy . Whole life on a child is an investment in their future , not just their death .
That depends entirely upon how the child support agreement was constructed . If there is not a specific requirement in the child support agreement that the person required to provide child support is required to provide health insurance for the child -LRB- ren -RRB- then there is a very high probability that they would not be required to provide health insurance . So , if the child support judgment requires one partner to just pay `` X '' amount of dollars every month for child support and makes no mention of a requirement to provide health insurance either out of that amount or in addition to it is unlikely that without a new judgment the ex-partner would have to provide health insurance . In my experience , a good divorce attorney specifically addresses this issue in writing in the order of child support as to which parent has the responsibility for providing health insurance for dependent children and even the potential duration of this requirement and the circumstances where it might be voided -LRB- re-marriage for example -RRB- . I am sure the rules on this crucial issue vary from state to state . Any couple with children who are divorcing should have this issue of responsibility for health insurance coverage clearly spelled out in their divorce and child support agreement .
In what way do you mean ? As a college funding choice , possibly , but it would require significant investment that might be better spent on the parents to insure college . A life insurance policy on a child is a good idea for several reasons . Set up properly it is a financial cornerstone to a sound financial portfolio beginning for a child as they grow into adulthood . Imagine locking in a price that is extremely low and having it gain in value over the years into adulthood . Add the option of guaranteed insurability to the plan and you 've taken away the ability for an insurance company to say `` no '' to your child in the future . That is extremely valuable . Now , let 's look at the sad side of insurance on a child . What if you need it ? As heartbreaking as it would be to lose a child , imagine having to figure out what you can `` afford '' for a service or headstone ? Imagine how much time you 'll need off of work and what your employer would cover salary wise ? For the same reason I purchased insurance as a young single man , long before I went into this business , I did n't want a double or triple whammy for my parents who would already be dealing with my death . Throw lost wages in there and having to find the money to bury me and I 've created devastation in my household . While may God forbid , if you were to lose a child , is n't that enough ?
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Critical Illness coverages can provide money to replace lost income and to pay the expenses not coverage by your medical insurance . Studies have shown that medical insurance covers only about 40 % of the true cost of a serious disease such as disease . In addition to medical coinsurance and deductibles , there is loss of income to contend with . The person that is off sick may have disability income insurance to help with this but often the spouse has to also miss work and there is nothing to replace their income . And , if it is their child that is sick , often both will miss work with no income replacement . When you add all the additional expenses of travel , special diets , transportation , child care , etc. the additional expenses can be devastating to a family . One thing I had never thought of before I had a bout with cancer was clothing expenses . I went from 215 lbs to 140 lbs which meant i had to buy new clothes . Now that I am at 185 lbs , my fat clothes do n't fit and my skinny clothes don '' t fit so I have to buy more . Critics of Critical Illness insurance say it is not a good buy because you might have a condition that is not covered under the policy but if you bought a plan that covered every possible event , the cost would be prohibitive . However , you can buy coverage for some of the most common serious conditions at a very reasonable premium . I have never had a cancer patient tell me that their caner or CI policy was a bad buy .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
A child rider on Term life insurance adds life insurance to your policy that will cover your child -LRB- ren -RRB- . It is usually available to children age 15 days to approx age 17 -LRB- the age varies by company -RRB- . You select a face amount of the child rider , usually between $ 5,000 and $ 25,000 . This that would pay if a tragedy occurred in your family , and you lost one or more of your children . The child rider benefit would pay that entire amount for each deceased child . The rider pays for death by any reason , just as your policy does , with the exception of suicide in first two years , or if your child had a serious health condition that was not disclosed on the application and death occurred during the first two years of purchasing the rider . If your child has type 1 diabetes , intellectual disability , or other maladies , unfortunately , they will not be able to be on the rider.Therefore , it is good to get the rider while your first child is young ; then the rest are automatically added . While few children pass away , the real value of a child rider can come when your child turns approx 25 -LRB- again , the age varies by company -RRB- . At that time the child rider can usually be changed to a permanent life insurance policy of about 5 times the face amount of the child rider . They do not ask any health questions , so if your child developed an illness after being put on the rider , it will not matter . They will then have a reasonably priced life insurance policy for the rest of their lives .
To protect yourself and your family against the financial risk of illness or injury and to finance necessary preventive health care needs . If you are a billionaire you can disregard this advice . If you are a regular American then you disregard it at your own peril . Health care is expensive . I had to answer this question recently for some people who had immigrated to the U.S.A. , were rather young to early middle aged and who had n't had occasion to use much health care in our country yet . So here are a few ball park figures I gave them from a report from 2012 . The average cost of an appendectomy is around $ 13,300 . The average cost of a day in the hospital is over $ 3400 . A normal child birth runs around $ 8000 and a C-section birth can be in the $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 range . And this is just normal run of the mill life events most people will experience at some time . My late cousin lost his 7-year battle with prostate cancer and while he participated in a lot of experimental programs as M.D. Anderson that were either free of heavily subsidized we still loosely estimated that his medical costs that he could track over that period were well in excess of $ 2 million . My niece delivered a premature child at 26 weeks and the child spent another 6 + months in neonatal intensive care , they 've crossed the $ 1 million dollar threshold and the meter is still running as their child will probably require some level of treatment for the rest of his life . Oh , and you need to have health insurance to protect yourself against the individual mandate tax penalty included in ObamaCare . Which in 2015 will be $ 325 or 2 % of your income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- and that will steadily increase in following years . Hopefully this will help answer your question as to why someone would need health insurance .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Several reasons , some pretty straight forward and some you may not have given thought to . First is the misfortune of losing a child . What will you do ? Will you need time ? Will you need money to purchase the things you and your spouse want to for the child ? Can you turn to your spouse and say `` No , we ca n't aford that headstone , let 's get something cheaper . '' ? While it is easy to have an answer when not faced with the situation . It 's another thing to live through losing a child . Now for the positive . Locking permanent life insurance in for a child gives them the best price at the lowest cost when they are in the best health . The opportunity to build cash values over a long period of time is pretty good . The other thing you can do with a child 's policy is buy future insurability options where your child can increase their insurance later in life without medical underwriting at the same class . What these future options do is `` take away '' an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child later in life when maybe their health is not so good . This feature alone is more valuable than most imagine . I have insurance on my kids , never thought of a good honest reason not to provide it for them . It covered them while they grew and gives them a headstart as adults . It 's a positive thing to do .
There is three reasons to insure a child with permanent life insurance . First , the reason no one likes to think about , but a child 's death is devastating on all levels , but is a possibility . Not having the money to bury a child just adds extra hardship during an extremely difficult time . Second reason is to protect the child 's insurability . Once the child has a life insurance policy , they can in most cases increase face amounts without proof of underwriting . This is crucial to a child diagnosed with type I diabetes , cancer or even worse . The third and final reason to insure a child with life insurance is the cash value . Not only can you use the policy as a teaching moment for the child to learn to save but the many uses as the child grows into an adult . Cash value from a life insurance policy can be used for emergencies , hardships , as well as college , a down payment on a first house or even retirement . Child life insurance is so affordable and important , every parent should strongly consider it for their children .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
end question
start question
annuities
How Are Variable Annuities Valued ?
Variable annuities use a general account for guaranteed interest and separate accounts for equity and bond instruments . There are charges and fees associated with variable annuities , like most security products . Those fees must be satisfied before the earnings , if any , are applied to the remaining cash values . Keep in mind that you could lose money , still pay fees and may be subject to surrender charges from liquidation .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Products , in and of themselves , dont present a good value or a bad value . Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals .
Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities are classified as a security . Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities have separate sub accounts using market equities and bond investments that can lose money and incur policy expenses . A personal financial profile needs to be created with a risk tolerance assessment before moving forward with the purchase of a non-qualified or qualified tax deferred variable annuities or the allocation of the separate sub accounts . Variable annuity policy expense loads can be a concern as policy expenses are paid out of deposits made into the annuity regardless of positive or negative performance . Variable annuities , like all annuities , are designed ultimately for generating income . You may want to consider purchasing an income rider that may offer guaranteed lifetime income .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
A non-qualified , tax deferred fixed rate annuity is only as guaranteed as the contract provisions outline and is only as good as the annuity insurance company that issued the contract . That being said , many financial stable annuity insurance companies offer a non-qualified tax deferred fixed rate annuities , generally at 5 , 7 and 10 year periods . A non-qualified , tax deferred variable annuity is separate sub accounts which use equity and bond instruments in variable annuities . Because these accounts are market driven you can lose money . Currently the variable annuity feature of the income rider is attractive for investors with an established risk tolerance . There are many competitive variable annuity contracts available . ;
Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
Variable annuities are only good for people with a high level of risk tolerance . Variable annuities can lose money , as well as , gain money . Hence , the term variable . When looking at variable annuities make sure you understand the risks involved . There are some great agents that can help you decide if these investments are the best fit for your tolerance and situation . There are other annuities that do not pay as much interest but are safer . For example , some annuities offer `` floors '' . Every annuity has some pros and cons so just make sure you understand the contract .
The annuity offerings change all the time . The best today maybe not be the best tomorrow . Annuities are categorized into basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Sentinel is a very good fixed interest rate annuity company . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Genworth is a very good index annuity company . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money . Prudential is a very good variable annuity company .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Water Damage From Rain ?
The damage to the building its self would be covered b y the owner of the building but the damage to your belonging should be covered under your renters policy . Less your deductible . Unless it is exclude on your policy there should be converge for this type of damage . Read through your exclusions or talk to your agent or your carrier They should be able to tell you what is excluded .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
It will , but it also depends upon where the water came from . If there is a heavy wind and rain storm and the wind damages your roof , causing rain water to leak in and damage the inside of your home , there will be coverage for that . If on the other hand , the heavy rain does not causedirect damage to your home , but raises the water table in your property , which causeswater to leak into your basement , it is possible that there would not be any coverage for that because ground waterdamage is usually excluded under a homeowners policy . Be sure to ask your insurance professional about coverge for failure of any sewars or drainage systems like curtain drains or sump pumps . If you have such coverage , then you will be more likely to be covered if your basement fills with water as a result of any failure .
Yes and no ! The typical multi-peril homeowners policy water covers damage caused by rain under specific circumstances such as water windblown thru the roof shingles or a hole in the wall or roof caused by lightning . However if it rains to the degree that water collects on the ground and enter your home thru doors or windows , the homeowners policy does not cover it . That would require a flood insurance policy . If it rains and your sump pump fails and water fills your basement , most homeowners policies will NOT cover the loss , though many companies offers optional sump pump failure coverage . Consult your insurance professional for the details that apply in your state .
It depends on the origin and cause of the water . A distinction has to be made between flooding and water damage . A flood is usually caused by external water rising , usually from heavy rain or a river overflowing . Flood is not covered by most homeowner policies . Water damage is generally defined as water hitting your home before touching the outside ground . It can originate from a roof leaf or a broken pipe and is usually covered by homeowners insurance .
This really depends on a few factors . First , was this a sudden and accidental occurrence or did it happen over time ? Secondly , did the water enter from outside your home or did it come from inside ? Lastly , do you have coverage for water/sewer backup ? Many companies will offer this as an option . If the water enters from outside your home , the insurance company will treat this the same as a flood , which will not be covered unless you have flood insurance . The only exception to this rule is if it backs up through your sewer or sump AND you have water/sewer backup coverage on your policy . This still must be sudden and accidental such as during a period of heavy rain . If the water is slowly seeping through the walls or floor , they will not cover this as it 's deemed a maintenance problem , not an occurrence . If the water comes from inside your home , such as a burst pipe , they will normally cover the damage it causes . Water claims have become very common and insurance companies are paying much more attention to them to make sure they should be covering them . Your homeowners policy is intended to protect you from the sudden and accidental . Many people seem to think that it 's an excuse to avoid maintaining their homes . To avoid any problems at claim time , be sure your home is maintained , it will cost you a lot less in the long run .
There are circumstances where Homeowners Insurance may cover the damage caused by water leakage through a roof . It is best to check with your Insurance Professional , of course , about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . If the roof is compromised or damaged by a covered peril , say a severe windstorm for example , then if rain water leaks in and damages the interior of your home , you will probably have coverage . Likewise , and as was the case again this past winter in CT , if you have interior water damage that is caused by `` Ice damming '' which is a sever build up of ice forming at the lower edge of your roof , that then forces melted water up under your roofing material , there will also be coverage . These are only two examples , so again talk to your Insurance Professional .
A renters policy provides coverage for damage that is the result of a covered peril . Since there is a wide variety of forms this can not be answered for every case , however , most policies list windstorm or hail right after fire and lightning . These are the fundamental coverages contained in most policies . The coverage has some limitations . The company will normally not pay for loss to property inside a structure , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water , all whether driven by wind or not , which enter through an opening not made by the direct force of wind or hail . The company is not likely to pay for the loss to watercraft and their trailers unless inside a fully enclosed building . Smaller water craft normally have coverage . If your property damage is subject to ordinance or law , such as a connection for an appliance , there might be a limitation on the increased cost of replacement that comes because of that law or ordinance . If the hurricane causes landslides or erosion , damage to your personal property arising from that movement of land might not be covered either . The same is true if the damage comes from flood water or tidal waves . This exclusion applies whether it is caused by wind or not . If the hurricane interrupts power supply the insurance company probably will deny coverage on any loss that result from that cause , for example rotting food in a freezer . If you are running a business out of your apartment , the company will probably exclude any loss that comes from that business to include interruption because there isnt power or people can not reach your apartment . The chances are quite good that if a hurricane strikes your apartment , that your renters policy will replace your property up to the limits of the policy . This is when you find out how good your coverage is . If you have appropriate limits you could be fully restored , minus the deductible . It is very important to have the correct limits for coverage on your renters policy . To make sure that you have adequate coverage take a picture of everything that you own inside your apartment . Then make a chart showing the property and the estimated cost of replacing the property . When you add up that list you will have the amount of coverage you should set as a limit for your policy . The pictures and estimates should be stored off-site in case that hurricane becomes a reality . Hurricanes often result in a loss of life . While that might seem remote , this might be a good time to consider what will happen to those that you leave behind . A quick inventory of debts would be a good thing to have handy . If you can eliminate debts and pay for final expenses you would be a great help to those that you love . Every weekend we see people on street corners seeking donations or offering car wash services so they can pay the expenses for a loved one . It is sad but it can be avoided with just a small amount of planning .
Generally speaking , the coverage provided by a Tenants ' Policy is vey similar to that provided by a Homeowners ' Policy . The main difference is that with regard to property coverage , a Renters ' Policy protects YOUR belongings while a Homeowners ' protectes both the home and personal property . Remember that someone else owns your building or unit so they would have coverage for their interests . Water camage is a covered peril in both , though there can certainly be some differences . In a Renters Policy , if rain comes in through an open window , the damage caused to your couch , for example would be covered by your policy . If on the other hand , you made a mistakle and left the water running in the tub and it overflowed , not only would your policy provide coverage for your damages , but the liability portion would provide coverage for your landlord 's interest .
To have flood covered by any type of renters or homeowners coverage , you must have a special flood policy . Your homeowners and renters will cover water damage due to sewer backup , burst pipes , or rain damage from a leaking roof , it will not cover flood . There is a special Federal Flood Insurance program you can look in to if you live in a flood zone .
As long as were not talking about a flood your homeowners insurance policy will cover most water damage . Damage would include for example but not limited to a water or steam pipe suddenly bursting and damaging your dwelling . Wind driven rain would be another example or even overflow of tub , toilet , sink , or washer . The damage must be sudden and accidental .
Flood is a peril that is specifically excluded under a renters policy . Flood is generally caused by inundation of rain , tidal water or mudslide . If you had a pipe burst in your unit that would likely be covered if you had an ISO form HO-4 Renters policy . Keep in mind that there are limitations on expensive items such as jewelry , money & securities , fine arts etc. .
Great question . Yes comprehensive auto insurance covers fllod damage . If there was flood or lots of rain and you car was damage and water goes inside your car you can call your insurance company and file a claim . Comprehensive covers flood , fire , theft and even if a tree falls on your car .
Rain damage coverage on a homeowner 's insurance policy is a tricky issue . Generally , anything flood-related is not covered since there is a separate federal program for obtaining flood insurance . High winds , fire , theft and many other items are covered as named perils om home policies . But it is best to speak directly to a claims representative regarding specific water-related issues ... Or speak with your broker .
Perhaps it will yes , but it is a good idea to talk with your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Generally speaking if you suffer water damage in your home as a result of a roof leak caused by wind driven rain or if a tree falls on it and breaks through during a storm , or due to winter ice damming to use three examples , then you would more than likely have coverage subject to your policy deductible .
It depends upon the source of the water damage , the type of policy you have and whether the house is abandoned . To make this answer easier , lets assume that you have a Homeowners 3 policy and the house is either occupied or vacant -LRB- some furniture and presence -RRB- . Water damage from a burst pipe : typically your homeowners insurance will water damage from a burst pipe , however it will not cover the damaged pipe . You can get an endorsement to cover the damaged pipes . Water damage from rain/hail/wind : this will only be covered on a basic homeowners policy if the rain/hail caused the hole in the roof that lead to the water damage in your bathroom . Once again , you can get an endorsement to cover rain/hail/wind damage . Water damage from sewer backup or sump-pump failure : if the bathroom is in the basement and the water damage if from sewer backup or sump-pump failure you can only get coverage for this IF you have the appropriate endorsement - sewer and water backup . Please note that this is typically a sub-limit in your policy and goes towards both cleanup and replacement . I hope this helps .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
A homeowners policy doesnt cover any loss for property inside a structure that is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enter the house through an opening not made by the direct force of the wind or hail . That means that you really need a flood policy . 25 % of property losses in the USA are the result of flood . The problem is so great that insurance is underwritten by the Federal Government . Agents generally , have access to flood coverage for your home and many companies will discount your homeowners policy if you have a valid flood policy .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Depends on what caused the leak . No for flood -LRB- rain that hits the ground -RRB- nor a continuous -LRB- over Time -RRB- maintenance type leak . The homeowners policy is designed for spontanous leaking of water . e.g. burk pipe , leaking washing machine hose , snapped the shower handle off and it took 1/2 hour to find the shut off . I use these examples because they have happened to my clients Patrick
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Which Company Has The Cheapest Car Insurance ?
I have been selling auto insurance for 23 years andi can tell you , they all do . It really depends on your circumstances . I have worked for two captive companies and now I sell for manydifferent companies . Many things going into determining your price . Your driving record , your credit , how many cars you own , your age , what kind of car , the coverage you choose , how long you have been insured with the same company . It is good to shop around , but it is also good to stay with the same company for at least 3-5 years to get the bestprice the next time your shop . Call at least 3 for quotes .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
I 'll share a common answer to a common question . It depends . Which company offers the cheapest auto insurance in Washington depends primarily on the insuredthe client . With all the variables companies use to get the final price , there is no way to tell what companies offers the cheapest rates for all clients all the time . In fact , most insurance companies do n't want to be the cheapest for every client . Most companies want to `` win '' accounts based on price 30-40 % of the time . With that information , it 's important to allow a trusted , licensed agent to shop multiple companies for you .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
As good life insurance policy is one that is in force the day that you die . I suppose you could speculate that the cheapest life insurance policy is one that was scheduled to reach the end of its term the day following your death . If you know when you are going to die , I can tell you which policy is cheapest . Since few of us know this the choice we generally make is which policy will give me all the coverage that I need during the time frames in which I need it . As for the name of the company , please understand that life insurance companies are highly regulated . Your state insurance commissioners job is to make sure that the death claim is paid when it is owed . Money from a B - insurance company is just as negotiable as an A + company .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
If you go to a website that offers free , instant life insurance quotes from multiple companies , you can enter some factors -LRB- date of birth , gender , term length , face amount , etc -RRB- and see which life insurance companies have the lowest quotes . If there were no questions about build or health , you are most likely viewing quotes for the best rate class , which may not be the class you qualify for . But that exercise does give you an idea of which companies offer the cheapest rates for term insurance for those in perfect health . Keep in mind that being overweight , having a health condition , or being older will probably result in other companies offering the cheapest rates . To find the lowest priced term life insurance rates for you , it is best to call an agent so that they can gather all these variables and do the shopping for you .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
The cheapest renter 's policy is the one that pays the full amount of a claim and leaves you paying nothing more than the deductible . Everything else costs too much ! You probably wanted to know what company or type of company is cheapest but that is not really a bargain . Having enough coverage with a company that will pay the claim is the cheapest way you can go .
The cheapest long term care insurance company in Colorado varies according to the person who is applying . Some companies are better at older ages ; some are better for couples . Some are better for -LRB- or are the only ones that will take -RRB- certain health conditions . Some offers certain features at a lower price than others . To find the cheapest long term care insurance for you , contact an agency that sells a variety of long term care companies in Colorado and review your health and all the features offered with a knowledgeable agent . Together , you can work out which has the lowest price for what you qualify for and what you need .
Everyone wants to pay less for car insurance butbe careful purchasingthe cheapest policy . Purchasing the cheapest policy onlinemay cost you severly down the road . For example , a home owner in Virginia recentlypurchased a policy online with state minmium limits . The policy was $ 15 less per month so he decided to switch . Two months later he was hit by an uninsured driver and in the hospital for 3 months . The new policy he purchased did not cover his car much less his medical bills . Cheaper is notbetter sowhen it comes to insurance focus on finding the best value .
`` Cheaper '' in premium or `` cheaper '' in service provided and claims paid ? No one insurance company will always be the `` cheapest '' in premium . If you are looking for the cheapest premium , you best plan on shopping and switching monthly because competitive pricing/positioning is ALWAYS changing . However if you value appropriate coverage for your station in life , do your research on reputable companies , find an insurance professional you trust and stick with him or her . It will average out in the long term . You potentially do yourself a financial disservice at claim time if you elect to go with the cheapest .
You can find the cheapest auto insurance at your agents office . The cheapest auto insurance is the policy with adequate limits that pays damages that result from an accident . Since this can involve personal injury and property damage , the amount can increase rapidly . Your agent will listen to you , offer sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . When you have a claim , you will be happy that you have the cheapest insurancethe one that pays !
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
The cost of Critical Care Insurance varies according to the age of the applicant , whether or not they use tobacco , their BMI , if they have a family history of certain illnesses , and whether they themselves have any health conditions . Therefore , what is the cheapest Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan for one person , may not be the cheapest for another . To find the cheapest quote for you , go to a website that offers Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan and call or visit them .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Globe Life Insurance Legitimate ?
Globe Life Insurance is a small 3 billion asset life insurance company with ratings from the following rating services . A.M. Best -LRB- Best 's Rating , 15 ratings -RRB- A + -LRB- 2 -RRB- , Standard & Poor 's -LRB- Financial Strength , 20 ratings -RRB- AA - -LRB- 4 -RRB- , Moody 's -LRB- Financial Strength , 21 ratings -RRB- , Fitch Ratings -LRB- Financial Strength , 21 ratings -RRB- A + -LRB- 5 -RRB- , Comdex Ranking -LRB- Percentile in Rated Companies -RRB- 92 Asset Analysis as of July 3 , 2013 .
Hah ! Interesting question and it makes me wonder what you 've heard ... Globe Life Insurance Company is indeed a registered insurance company so it conforms to the standards of practice mandated by the law . Therefore it is a legitimate company . I have heard some things about their products and service that make me wonder if they are a good choice , but I have had no personal experience with them . I always recommend that you consult with an insurance adviser / broker that can explain the different products and their benefits and drawbacks to you before you decide which way to go .
Do you mean Globe Life ? Globe Life is a life insurance company that offers final expense , accident , and mortgage protection insurance . They are certainly a legitimate insurer that focuses more on middle and working class families to offer them smaller insurance policies to meet financial obligations these people generally do not have the money on hand to meet .
Hah ! Interesting question and it makes me wonder what you 've heard ... Globe Life Insurance Company is indeed a registered insurance company so it conforms to the standards of practice mandated by the law . Therefore it is a legitimate company . I have heard some things about their products and service that make me wonder if they are a good choice , but I have had no personal experience with them . I always recommend that you consult with an insurance adviser / broker that can explain the different products and their benefits and drawbacks to you before you decide which way to go .
I could not find any indication that Globe Life is associated with CMFG , but called Globe Life to confirm . Their representative said that if your policy is with Globe Life , your statement should say Globe Life . It may be that you have a policy with `` globe '' in the product title , or got your policy through Global Credit Union ?
That is a great question ! Globe Life is a subsidiary of Torchmark , A Fortune 500 financial services company . they were originally Liberty National Insurance company until 1980 when they acquired Globe Life , and formed the torchmark holding company . My best guess would be that they have a portion of that company that handles their banking , that most likely goes through CUNA , -LRB- Credit Union National Association -RRB- , the marketing group for your mysterious CMFG -LRB- CUNA became CMFG in 2012 -RRB- . Or CMFG bought a part of Globe 's life business , which is a fairly common practice - The big financial companies buy/sell blocks of mortgages and other investments that may include life insurance policies in order to earn more money themselves . It may be that the CMFG people -LRB- who sell services to credit unions and consumers -RRB- bought a chunk of Globes business , with yours in it . I 'd call Globe , or drop them an email to their customer service people and ask them why , and make sure you know who owns your policy , so you know who to contact/collect from . It can be very confusing when high finance starts swapping assets , and we little folk try to keep track ... I had a mortgage that was sold 4 times that I know of ! Good luck , I would n't worry too much , just be sure . Thanks for asking !
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company was rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . This company , like every life insurance company , has their niche . Globe Life 's niche is doing policies online and through the mail . While handy , they do not allow people to get as much life insurance as they might want , and going through medical underwriting can save many people money vs buying No Exam coverage online . Whether Globe Life Insurance is good for you depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay .
Per Globe Life 's website , Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Touchmark Corporation , which is a holding company that specializes in life and supplemental health insurance , and has its main office in McKinney , TX . Globe Life 's home office is located in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma .
If you have a Globe Whole Life insurance policy that has accumulated cash value beyond any surrender charges or outstanding loans , you will most likely be able to cash it in . Call Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company at 972-540-6542 with your policy number to talk to a representative and see if you are able to cash in your Globe Life insurance policy .
The price of Globe Life Insurance depends on the type of policy you purchase , your age , gender , and other factors . So it is impossible to state a dollar amount for Globe Life Insurance . While the company offers some good rates , their choices for coverage are not too extensive . So you may want to contact Globe to see what rate you can get , then compare it with other companies using the quote engines provided on many websites .
Gerber Life is a `` legitimate '' life insurance company in that it is domiciled in the state of NY and is located at 1311 Mamaroneck Ave. , White Plains , NY , 10605 , 914272-4000 , and is licensed to do business in all 50 states and Canada . They list six product groups on their website , WEBSITELINK , includingthe onlyendowment life policy that is also an adult life insurance policy . It 's called the Gerber Life College Plan and has been their flagship policy for a long time . They are definitely a niche carrier , targeting the parent and grandparent market . Their contracts have many guaranteed features that appeal to those that do n't want to take any chances that their insurance might lapse or diminish in value over time . I have worked with their service teams on a few occasions and they are knowledgeable and very customer-oriented . The have been rated `` A '' , AM Best 's third-highest financial rating , and `` A - '' by Weiss , which is their 3rd best rating as well . Both of those ratings are within the `` Excellent '' range of both rating services . That gives them a Comdex of `` 80 '' , which means that 80 % of all financially-rated carriers are ranked below them . If by `` legitimate '' you are referring to their contracts being of real value , or if can you trust a life insurance company that is also a baby food company , you may want to do more research . From and industry point of view , they are legitimate .
Globe Life Insurance , well known for its $ 1 advertisement for the first month 's premium , is an A + rated carrier . As such , they are financially strong . My issue with Globe is in the small print . The level premium increases every 5 years making it virtually impossible for the insured 's to keep a policy at older ages . Most everyone I speak with about Globe was unaware of this important feature . Buyer beware !
As Peggy stated above , if your Globe policy is a whole life policy and has grown some cash value the you should be able to borrow against it . However I would advise you to first find out what the interest rate is and if Globe uses `` direct recognition '' regarding policy loans . Because Globe is a stock company therefore the policy holders do not enjoy the sharing of dividends as with a mutual company . So you may be better off taking a loan from a bank if you ca get a low interest loan . For more on how `` Direct Recognition '' affects a policy loan and why it is imperative that you know their policy before taking a loan , please see the article here : WEBSITELINK
Globe life insurance markets term life insurance , whole life insurance , accidental death insurance , mortgage protection plans , and medicare supplements . Two versions of the whole life policies do build up cash value that you can borrow against . The Children 's whole life policy is called `` The Young American Plan '' and there is a Whole Life policy that adults can purchase . The face amounts of Globe policies are pretty low so if you are looking for policies to accumulate cash , there are better options available .
Globe life insurance is an A + rated life insurance company that has been around since 1951 . Globe offers term insurance , whole life insurance and children 's insurance . They have a deal where you pay $ 1 for the first month and then your premium is based on your age at the time of issue .
Global Life Insurance is a reference to Globe Life Insurance . Globe is a company that sells life insurance online and through the mail . While popular with those who want smaller policies with little effort , it may not work for those who want larger policies or who want to shop for the lowest price .
Per their website , you can borrow money from a Globe Life Insurance policy . The policy must be Whole Life that you have had long enough to build up a cash value . You can take out a policy loan to borrow against the cash value that has built up in your Globe Whole Life policy .
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company began in 1951 in Oklahoma City Oklahoma and is a subsidiary of Torchmark Corporation . The company has more than 66 billion in force . In 1972 , Globe Life created Employee Services Division to service the Government organizations . It is one of the largest direct to consumer insurance companies in the U.S. .
An insurance carrier is only as good as their rating . Globe Life in my opinion is a quality carrier for three reasons : 1 -RRB- over 50 years old 2 -RRB- A + credit rating 3 -RRB- Over $ 60 bil of life insurance in force The bottom-line is people buy it and have been buying it for a long time . They have to be doing something right to keep satisfied clients paying their premiums . For free real-time life insurance quotes through Globe and other carriers please visit : www.clminsure.com or call me directly at 561-320-2978
If your Globe Life Insurance policy has net cash value after subtracting surrender charges and fees , you could cash it in just as you can any other Whole Life policy . Before doing so , you should talk to a Globe agent to see what other options your policy has , and to make sure you are making the correct choice in cashing it in .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can An Employer Cancel Health Insurance While An Employee Is On Disability ?
Yes your employer can cancel your health insurance while on disability . There are two key laws that may protect your rights while you are unable to work . The Family Medical Leave Act -LRB- FMLA -RRB- requires that employers continue to provide health insurance coverage on the same basis as if the employee was working . These protections last for twelve weeks , so your employer could cancel your coverage after this time . The FMLA applies only to businesses with 50 or more employees , and employees working a specified number of hours . If you are not eligible for FMLA , your employer could cancel your policy at any time . COBRA allows for employees to continue coverage for up to 18 months . If you employer cancels your policy , you can keep it in force by making the premiums payments yourself . You would lose the employer contribution , and the advantages of pre tax elections for your contribution .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
Yes your employer can cancel your health insurance while on disability . There are two key laws that may protect your rights while you are unable to work . The Family Medical Leave Act -LRB- FMLA -RRB- requires that employers continue to provide health insurance coverage on the same basis as if the employee was working . These protections last for twelve weeks , so your employer could cancel your coverage after this time . The FMLA applies only to businesses with 50 or more employees , and employees working a specified number of hours . If you are not eligible for FMLA , your employer could cancel your policy at any time . COBRA allows for employees to continue coverage for up to 18 months . If you employer cancels your policy , you can keep it in force by making the premiums payments yourself . You would lose the employer contribution , and the advantages of pre tax elections for your contribution .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
No American employer is required to provide health insurance to their employees . What the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- imposes is an employer mandate that employers of certain sizes must offer their employees health insurance that meets certain minimum essential benefit coverage requirements and an affordability level to the employee . If such an employer chooses not to offer group health insurance to their employees the employer will be subject to an employer mandate tax penalty charged on a per employee basis . In 2015 employers with 100 + employees will be subject to this requirement with the size threshold dropping to 50 + employees in 2016 . Employers with less than 50 employees are not required to offer coverage . While on the face of it the employer mandate would seem to be an incentive for larger employers to offer health insurance to their employees it 's true effects are yet to be seen and are quite debatable . For example , the cost of the tax penalty is generally far less than the cost of insuring an employee thus perhaps creating an incentive to take the lower cost of the tax penalty and to send your employees to the health insurance marketplaces to buy their own coverage .
Group health insurance is a health insurance policy or plan -LRB- depending upon how it is funded -RRB- that is provided by an employer for its employees or through an organization such as a labor union for its members . In a group health insurance policy situation the employer is the actual policy holder and its employees and covered dependents are subscribers who receive a certificate of coverage . In this context the employee 's health insurance is tied to their place of employment and while -LRB- depending upon the size of the group -RRB- there are state and federal laws that allow for an ex-employee to continue their coverage through the group plan for some defined period of time , eventually a former employee will lose access to their ex-employer 's group plan and have to replace it coverage from a new employer or individual health insurance . With the latest round of implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- effective January 1 , 2014 group health insurance is in many ways more complicated than ever before . For instance , employers in the 2 to 50 employee market segment in the vast majority of statesnow operate in a community rated situation and are finding that new benefit plan designs are being presented to them that may differ significantly from their current rate structures and plan designs . Fully insured ACA compliant health plans for the 2 to 50 market segment are now guaranteed to be issued , are not subject to underwriting and can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods -LRB- just to highlight some of the most major changes -RRB- . Larger sized groups , while they are certainly impacted by the effects of the ACA , are still operating under a mix of the old rules and the new ones . So , right now groups with 51 + employees are still subject to underwriting , though the new ACA rules will be migrating up the ladder to apply to groups in the 51 to 99 employee range in the future . There will be groups who will be winners and losers under the requirements of the ACA and depending upon the composition of the group and its average income levels for its workforce , some employers may find that providing group health insurance is no longer in the best financial interest of many of their employees when compared with the subsidized individual health insurance that many of their employees could qualify for . If you are an employer faced with these issues and are looking for experienced guidance on these matters please feel free to contact me for a consultation .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
There remains a lot of confusion over this issue in the wake of the passing of the health care reform law -LRB- ObamaCare , the Affordable Care Act -RRB- and justifiably so . Technically speaking , ObamaCare does not force any employer to offer health insurance to their employees , their is no criminal penalty for failure to do so . That point made , the Affordable Care Act consists of a mix of tax incentives and tax penalties to supposedly induce employers to provide health insurance for their employees . First of all , for employers with 2 to49 employees there are no tax penalties at all for failure to provide health insurance to their employees . A tax credit is offered but with enough limitations associated with it that only a tiny percentage of small employers have ever taken advantage of it . For employers who are at and above the 50 full time and/or full time equivalent employee level they will be the ones who will be faced with tax penalties for failing to provide health insurance and/or failing to provide affordable health insurance to their employees . The first employers to be impacted will be those with 100 or more full time employees in 2015 . Then , starting in 2016 , employers in the 50 to 99 employee range will be subject to the same tax penalty . The tax penalty will be $ 2000 per employee per year and will be a non-deductible business expense . Not surprisingly , the situation is more complicated than I have just described but there is not space here to go into all the details involved . Suffice it to say , this is an issue of great concern to many employers , especially ones who have not offered health insurance to their employees or a large segment of their employees in the past . The restaurant , hospitality and trucking industries are some common examples of industries that can expect to be adversely impacted financially by the tax penalty . For consultation on this issue please feel free to contact me .
Yes . Absent a collective bargaining agreement with a labor union , which are increasingly rare , an employer makes a voluntary decision to offer health insurance and other benefits to their employees . There has never been a legal requirement in our nation for an employer to offer health insurance to their employees . The Affordable Care Act contains provisions that can apply tax penalties to employers above certain group sizes for not offering health insurance or the approved level of coverage and it offers inducements in the form of tax credits to smaller employers to provide health insurancebut even this law does not force an employer to provide health insurance to their employees . So , generally speaking , an employer is free to not offer health insurance to their employees or to terminate an existing group health insurance plan that they have had in effect . Indeed , the higher costs imposed by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have already had the perverse effect of pushing some employers to the decision to cancel their group health plans .
Employers providing some life insurance for their employees goes back well over a century when working conditions were often more hazardous and the workforce was overwhelmingly male . The death of an employee who was often the sole bread winner for his family would leave the spouse and/or children saddled with funeral expenses and a loss of income . Such situations were often viewed as harming the morale of other employees and reducing productivity as co-workers would often be taking time to raise money to assist the family of their late co-worker . It was also not uncommon for the family of the deceased employee to turn to the former employer requesting financial assistance which obviously put the employer in an uncomfortable situation . Term life insurance was an inexpensive way for the employer to address this employee need while enhancing employee loyalty and morale and avoiding workplace disruption . Since then the provision of employee life insurance became institutionalized as employee benefit plans became the norm . In fact , for many years it was not uncommon industry practice for the group 's health insurance carrier to require the bundled sale of some term life insurance when they implemented coverage for an employer group -LRB- a practice that has since been discontinued -RRB- . As such , employer 's providing life insurance for their employees has been a mix of employer 's looking out for their employees and their families , protecting their own self-interests , tradition and industry practices . Term life insurance still remains one of the least expensive benefits an employer can provide to their employees that often has the most emotional impact when it is actually needed .
I believe what you are referring to is what 's called `` split-dollar '' life insurance . This type of life insurance is generally used for businesses to help an employee purchase coverage - it can be used as a form of deferred compensation or as an incentive for the employee to work at that company . The idea of a split-dollar policy is to share or `` split '' aspects of the program between two parties -LRB- again - generally employer and employee -RRB- , including ownership , premiums , death benefits , cash value , and dividends . The advantages for the employee in doing this type of policy is to get the coverage they need to protect their family , but at a cheaper price . When the employer is paying premiums , the employee may be able to reduce their income tax liability when in higher tax brackets . Upon the death of the employee , the proceeds can be used to provide for estate liquidity . So why would the employer do all of this rather than make the employee buy an individual policy on their own ? In short , tax purposes . While it allows the employer to provide benefits to their employee with low costs , the portion of premiums the employer pays can be deducted for tax purposes . Upon the death of the employee , the employer is paid an amount equal to the sum of premiums paid on behalf of the deceased employee . These plans feature a good amount of flexibility for the employer as well , as they can modify or terminate the program at their discretion .
Many employees have been surprised and concerned to see the value of their employer provided health insurance being reported on their W2 's . This is a requirement of the Affordable Care Act . Under transitional relief guidelines issued , so far only employers who issue 250 or more W2 forms in a calendar year are required to report this information . Eventually all employers who provide health insurance to their employees will be required to report this information on the employee 's W2 . This reporting of the employer paid amount for health insurance is for `` informational '' purposes only and is not being added to the employee 's gross income for income tax purposes . There are some skeptics who see this as a precursor to the eventual tax treatment of employer paid health insurance as employee income at some future date but at this time there is nothing in the Affordable Care Act or any pending legislation that would do this . Where this reporting of employer paid health insurance will become a tax issue will be in 2018 when the `` Cadillac Tax '' portion of the health care law goes into effect . The Cadillac Tax will be a 40 % excise tax imposed on health insurance plans whose annual premium costs exceed $ 10,200 for an individual or $ 27,500 for family coverage -LRB- these amounts will be indexed for inflation -RRB- . So , an employer in 2018 who finds themselves with health plan premium levels exceeding these amounts will be assessed a 40 % tax penalty . While such annual premium amounts may seem unreachable by many persons in 2014 . In some areas of the country , and especially with some very rich collectively bargained plans , total costs are already coming close to these trigger points . When one observes the increases in group health insurance plan costs already triggered by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act in 2014 and applies projected inflationary trend increases over the next few years it becomes much easier to estimate that a larger portion of employer based plans could find themselves subject to this tax penalty . This is one of the underlying motivations for more employers to move to high deductible health insurance plans in order to reduce their premium costs .
An employer can not discriminate against an employee based upon their age -LRB- among a multitude of other factors -RRB- . However , that does not necessarily mean that an older employee who compares what they are contributing towards their employer based health insurance with a younger co-worker of the same coverage level will find themselves paying the same amount . This may initially be perceived by the older employee as though they are being discriminated against but this is almost certainly not the case . If your employer 's group health insurance rates are age based rates then there is a different rate for each year of age for a covered employee . The community rating requirements of ObamaCare have pushed many health insurance carriers towards this age rated basis though some health insurance carriers still develop a `` composite '' rate for a group after quoting them on an age rated basis -LRB- composite rates are one rate for every employee with Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Employee + Child -LRB- ren -RRB- or Family coverage regardless of the employee 's age -RRB- . This is how things work under community rating . First of all , there can be no more than a 3 to 1 ratio between the rates for the youngest and oldest employees in the group . To keep things simple let 's say the monthly rate for a 25 year old is $ 200 per month then the monthly rate for a 60 year old would be $ 600 per month . Then let 's say that your employer pays 50 % of the employee only rate which leaves the other 50 % for the employee to pay . Under this scenario the 25 year old 's cost would be $ 100 per month -LRB- $ 200 x 50 % -RRB- and the 60 year old 's share would be $ 300 per month -LRB- $ 600 x 50 % -RRB- . Even though the dollar amount paid by each employee differs significantly the employer is treating them the same in that the employer is contributing the same percentage amount towards each employee 's coverage . Therefore , there is no discrimination . This is one of the effects of ObamaCare that is increasingly being seen by employees as their old health insurance plans and rate structures are being replaced by ObamaCare compliant plans and the new community rating method .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
This remains an area of great confusion to many small business owners . If you have less than 50 employees the answer is `` No '' . The employer mandate provision of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 100 or more full time employees beginning in 2015 and for employers with 50 to 99 full time employees in 2016 . Please note that when I use the term full time employees this means employees who work 30 + hours per week and also includes what are referred to as full time equivalent employees -LRB- FTEs -RRB- . FTEs are part time employees whose work hours are totaled up according to IRS approved calculations that are then translated into some number of full time employees to be added to the employer 's regular full time employee count to arrive at a total employment figure that may determine whether an employer is subject to the employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act or is eligible to participate in the SHOP -LRB- small business group insurance -RRB- offering -LRB- s -RRB- in the government health insurance marketplaces . Totally simple , right ? Any business owner would be well advised to seek out a knowledgeable health insurance broker/consultant to assist them is making these determinations and explaining the record keeling , tracking and reporting requirements the employer may be subject to under the Affordable Care Act . Getting this stuff wrong could have serious tax implications for the employer . If I can be of any assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me as I am a Chartered Benefit Consultant .
Long term care insurance provides benefits that extend beyond those paid under Medicare and most private insurance . The benefit is normally paid in months and at a predetermined level . The extremely helpful insurance is sometimes offered as a benefit by employers . If the employer pays the premium , the employer is able to deduct that cost from his own taxes as a reasonable business expense -LRB- employee benefit . -RRB- The employee does not incur any income tax liability as a result . When a benefit is received it comes to the employee free of income tax . There arent any non-discrimination rules that require an employer cover all of the employees . Executives should consider accepting an Employer Paid Long Term Care Insurance policy in exchange for a salary reduction . It is a win situation for the employer and also a win situation for the highly valued employee . This benefit can be combined with a more comprehensive medical health care plan that includes additional benefits such as a comprehensive annual physical examination . This benefit can also be combined with a supplemental disability benefits program for valuable employees . Employer paid long-term care insurance is often combined with retiree medical insurance . Among employers the trend is to reduce or eliminate retiree medical benefits to the rank and file employees . For highly compensated employee there is a trend towards cost sharing arrangements for medical expenses after retirement .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
This has been a controversial area for several years as I presume you are asking about how to reimburse employees for the cost of individual health insurance . There had been a lot of activity which was embraced by a number of employers in past years to reimburse their employees for the cost of individual health insurance through the use of a Health Reimbursement Account -LRB- HRA -RRB- and making it a deductible business expense no different than an employer contribution to a group health insurance plan . In early 2013 the DOL and IRS issued statements that virtually every benefits professional recognized as being definitive in stating that this practice was not allowed . If an employer does not want to offer a group health insurance plan but wants to assist their employees in purchasing individual health insurance then the only practical way to do this appears to be by grossing up their pay by some amount . Of course , this is no different than giving the employees a pay raise from a tax perspective because that is exactly what you are doing . Also , this well intentioned action by the employer may have the unintended consequence of reducing or eliminating the amount of the Advanced Premium Tax subsidy that the employees might qualify for in the government health insurance marketplaces . But it is now clear than any employer support for employees purchasing their own health insurance can only be done on a post-tax basis . Depending upon a given group 's circumstances this may be a viable option to consider and is being done by some employers . This is an approach that needs to be handled with care and you should seek guidance regarding the applicability of this approach to your company 's specific situation . If you would like to learn more please feel free to contact me .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is Coinsurance On A Health Insurance Plan ?
Coinsurance is the amount of the bill you share with the insurance company , typically after your deductible has been satisfied . Most commonly you will see this as 80/20 -LRB- can be 50/50 , 70/30 , 90/10 and 100/0 -RRB- , whereas the insurance company pays 80 % and you pay 20 % . Your portion will be capped . This is known as Maximum out of Pocket .
What is coinsurance on a health insurance plan ? Well coinsurance is the part of the bill where the insured and the insurance split the payment of the bill . First there is the deductible , where the insured -LRB- you -RRB- pay the cost of the bill . Then once that is met or waived in some situations , the coinsurance kicks in and the cost is split between the insured and the insurance company .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and can help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
Medicare supplement Plan G covers the following benefits : 1 . Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 . Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- 4 . Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 . Skilled nursing fcility care coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A deductible 7 . Medicare Part B excess charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Out of the 9 benefits available under Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plans , Plan G covers 8 of them - the 9th benefit being your Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 - covered under plans C and F -RRB- . Plan F covers all 9 benefits . Medicare supplement plans are standardized ! Meaning plan G from company A is the same plan G from company B. Work with an independent agent/broker that can compare different carriers to determine which will be most suitable for your program .
Medigap Plan N is one of ten standardized plans offers coverage in addition to the standard benefits provided by other Medicare Supplement plans . It is most simiiar to Medigap Plan D , with two major exceptions . With N , you are responsible for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to a $ 50 copayment for emergency room visits that do n't result in inpatient admission before your Part B coverage being paying expenses at 100 % . Basic benefits offered by Plan N include : Medicare Part A hospital coinsurance and other costs up to an additional 365 days after Original Medicare benefits are exhausted Medicare Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayments -LRB- except for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to a $ 50 copayment for emergency room visits that do not result in inpatient care -RRB- First three pints of blood used in a medical procedure Plan N also offers the following additional benefits : Skilled Nursing Facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign travel emergency care -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- When available , many consumers find they can save $ 50 per month or more when compared to the more popular Plan F . If your doctor accepts Medicare assignment as payment in full , and you do not see your physician more than twice per month , Plan N can be a great way to lower your overall health care expenses .
There are 9 benefits that Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plans can cover - plan F covers all of them at 100 % from day 1 . Other Medigap plans only cover some of the benefits . The 9 benefits covered under plan F are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Plan F will generally feature the highest premiums as it provides the most comprehensive coverage . The major advantage of plan F is that it creates the most predictable expense structure for the insured - a critical factor for many of those on a fixed income in retirement . If you would like to secure a Medicare supplement plan , please feel free to send me a private message -LRB- clicking on the `` contact me '' button -RRB- , or visit my website , www.TermInsuranceBrokers.com , to review detailed information regarding Medicare supplement plans .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Long Does It Take For A Car Insurance Claim ?
According to JD Power and Associates the average time to process an auto insurance claim is 14 days . Keep in mind that this is the average and certain circumstances regarding any specific claim may cause the claim to take less or more time .
Oh wow , unfortunately there is no black and white answer to this question . It varies drastically from carrier to carrier but also from claim to claim . Your actual claim will determine a lot about how long the process will take to full resolution . If it is a simple `` fender bender '' where things are pretty cut and dry , you are talking a matter of a couple of days ... with our carriers and on claims like this as soon as the field adjustor can get out to inspect the car , they are usually cutting a check on the spot . If seen claims like this close in a day , but also have seem them take a couple of days to close simply due to scheduling issues . More serious claims take longer . If fault is in questions and police reports have to be pulled , this takes time . If there are serious injuries or death , these take a lot of time . Typically you do n't have to wait until the claim is settled to start the repairs on your vehicle . If you car is `` totaled '' you might have to wait until it is settled . Each claim and carrrier is different and you have the right to stay informed about the process . Your adjustor will no more than your agent so stay in contact with them and ask them direct questions about the length of time things should take and what you should expect during the process . Contact your local independent agent and ask them specifics on the claims process of their carriers .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
You can always change insurance companies , there 's nothing to stop you . However , you may want to stick with what you have during a claim . Legally , an insurance company has to settle claims according to their policy whether you 're still insured with them or not . In practice , these are human beings working on your claim and they may not always give you consideration if you 've cancelled your coverage with them . Let 's look at an example . Let 's say you 've gotten into an accident and you 're car is in the body shop . You want OEM parts installed on your car , but the insurance company wants to use aftermarket parts because they cost less . They have more of an incentive to honor your request if you 're still insured with them because they see an opportunity to offset your claim with future premiums . Another factor to consider is the company you want to go to . They may not want to insure a car that has unrepaired damage . It 's totally up to the company . Now , in my experience , you would only ask the question if you do n't like how your claim is being handled . If you were totally satisfied , you would n't think about switching . My advice is to stay with your current company and negotiate with their claims department to get your claim settled to your satisfaction . Check your policy , all companies have an appeals process if you do n't agree with how your claim is being settled . Take advantage of it . You may get some consideration and a better settlement . If you 're still unsatisfied , you can always consider the courts , but this is a risky proposition unless you 're sure you 're in the right . After your claim is settled , you can explore new companies . A good agent will help you with claims if you 're not satisfied . They can not always ensure you 'll get what you want , but a good one will go to bat for you . In my opinion , finding the right advisor is the most important decision you make . In the long run , you 'll come out ahead even if they 're more expensive now . The cost of your coverage is n't just the premium , it 's what it costs you in time , money , and aggravation at claim time .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Lets say you have a hundred friends and each has an automobile . If they could agree that they wanted to have enough money to pay legal expenses that they might have if they are responsible for an accident , you could form an insurance company . If you were able to determine -LRB- from actuarial studies -RRB- the amount of money you could anticipate spending in helping each other out in the coming year and the amount was $ 50,000 you would then know the basic share for each friend , $ 500 -LRB- $ 50,000 / 100 -RRB- Someone in your group will probably object because they only take their car to shows once or twice a year and certainly dont have the exposure the rest of the friends have . Another will object because they live on a farm and rarely drive into town -LRB- although it might be a long ways . -RRB- They will contend that their exposure is less than the other friends . Another friend will complain because one of the friends has a street-legal racing car and it is more likely that it will be involved in an accident . One of your friends has a drinking problem and no one really wants a share of his legal liability . And so it goes . What at one time seemed simple and logical becomes increasingly complex . Actuaries are a rare group of people who compile data and have the ability to slice that data in many different ways to determine the effects of the location where the car is garaged , average annual miles , credit risk of the owner , make , model and year of the vehicle . In fact , these actuaries can compute over 100 rating areas for an automobile . The point that this exercise makes is to distribute the risk that all of us face equitably . I have been asked if a red car costs more to insure than others . I am sure that a study somewhere has shown that red cars have a slightly higher than average accident rate . It is something that could be used in the rating process . I have been asked if a previously totaled car , now registered legally can be insured based upon that same concern for a fair premium . So actuaries give the insurance company many alternatives upon which they can design a rating scheme for an automobile . In my state the scheme is set by state law . Actually the California Constitution dictates how automobile policies will be rated . So legislative action can have a profound effect on automobile rating . Most states give authority to their insurance commissioner to regulate automobile insurance rates . Their charge is not so much to maintain fairness as it is to make sure that the companies take in enough premiums to pay the claims that are anticipated . In other words , the commissioner does everything in his or her power to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . Insurance companies keep very close tabs on the claims that they pay and the premiums that they take in . Actually the actuaries get involved in this as well , to determine if they are charging enough for every different type of coverage . When the company fails to receive enough premiums to pay all of the claims in a given year , they approach the commissioner and propose a rate increase . At this point the company has done everything possible to spread the risk appropriately , however , there are some areas that they want to adjust to make sure that the company is being fair and that the company can continue to keep its promises . That is how a company computes what it will charge you for your car .
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Do I Need Universal Life Insurance ?
You may not need Universal Life Insurance . If you have a temporary need and want a large policy for the lowest possible price , Term Life Insurance would probably work best . If you want a small final expense policy , Whole Life is easiest to get , and comes in the smallest face amounts . Where you may choose Universal Life is if you want a low cost permanent product of a substantial face amount but with little to no cash value -LRB- GUL -RRB- , or if you want to use your life insurance as a type of investment along with death benefit -LRB- VUL or IUL -RRB- .
You do not need any particular life insurance product . You need to establish your financial profile , risk tolerance and economic goals . If universal life is to be part of that based on product suitability , then so be it . There are four types of universal life products : current assumption , index , variable and guaranteed universal life . The first three should be explored for tax advantaged , supplemental retirement income scenarios and the last one for permanent coverage to indemnify your beneficiaries .
Universal Life is a unique product . The advantages of a Universal Life Policy are : Flexible Premiums , you can put more into the policy to act as a savings and enhance cash accumulation . You can skip payments as long as there is enough in the cash value to continue the insurance . You can decrease the face amount or increase the face amount -LRB- as long as your health qualifies -RRB- . It has a competitive interest rate . It is a good way to get a lot of insurance for a lower premium than whole Life . The disadvantages : It must be funded properly . Because you can skip or put less into the policy than the Target Premium , the policy could lose its death benefit . Picture a bucket of money . The bucket has a hole in it and it is dripping . If the water -LRB- money -RRB- going into the bucket is greater than the water going out of the bucket , you are OK . But if you do not have enough going into the bucket and it is draining faster than being filled , then the water will eventually run out . When that happens the insurance will cease . Universal Life is a good product , but not for everyone .
Simply put , term life insurance , whole-life life insurance , universal life insurance and annuities etc. are very important things to think about to protect your financial future . Generally , speaking the best time to think about these products is when you are talking to a licensed insurance agent and you can think them over together . All of these products , or a combination of these products , may suit your individual needs . I work for a few companies that offer high-cash value products that can be used for various business ventures or personal wealth-building opportunities , if set up properly . Therefore , when considering any of these insurance products it is usually best to meet with an agent so they can help you figure out which products you need , can afford and find out if you qualify for them .
Why do I need a universal life insurance policy ? Usually because you want a stable premium and can not afford a true whole life product to insure yourself . You are looking for a longer period of time to be covered than a term policy can offer . I would hope that if a person chooses UL , that they choose guaranteed universal life as that guarantee makes a UL a more stable product .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
There are two financially oriented universes : an insurance planning universe , and a financial planning universe . In the former , it never makes sense to buy term and those that live in that universe will give you an infinite number of reasons why - in the long run - it is a waste of your money . If you buy term , you will be called a `` termite '' . In the latter , term insurance - or permanent insurance - are viewed asfinancial vehicles that can be used to achieve a certain objective or several objectives at once , through leveraging : paying `` small '' dollars now for `` large '' dollars later . It 's called `` using the right tool for the job '' . Neither universe is right or wrong , although I would imagine you know which universe I come from . The point is to stay fixed on how much death benefit -LRB- coverage or face amount -RRB- you need and for how long . The way I see it , one needs term when they have a high need and a low budget , and a type of permanent insurance policy for when they eventually die . In other words , you need both . I recommend buying term in the higher amount that you need early in life -LRB- wife , kids , education , mortgage , etc. -RRB- for the period of time you are most likely to need it -LRB- 20-30 years -RRB- , but at the same time , buy a small face amount of permanent insurance to cover final expenses , projecting forward a nice , long lifetime and what it will probably cost to put you in a box , or reduce your mass through pyric methodolgies and put you in an urn . Allow for other final expenses , such as possible debt , medical expenses not covered by insurance , and a little `` transitional money '' for those you leave behind . That way , when your term runs out , you 'll have only the permanent plan to pay premium on , and , if you design it prudently , you might find that your final expense policy no longer needs any premium when your term runs out . You 'll need an experienced and knowledgeable agent from the appropriate universe to put this together for you so that it fits your budget . Final note : As has been appropriately mentioned in an answer above , be sure to purchase only `` fully convertible term '' for the reasons cited therein .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
There are five types of permanent life insurance policies : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Participating whole life and guaranteed universal life are used for indemnification planning . Participating whole life , with a max term rider and paid up additions rider can be used for income as can current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . The income design must conform to TAMRA and minimize the death benefit amount to optimize the crediting methodology .
Universal life insurance is a good idea if you need greater flexibility than is afforded by an ordinary whole life policy . With a universal life you can select the premium deposits within certain parameters and decide to suspend payments if there circumstances dictate . The flexibility combined with the potential greater return on the cash value are the key reasons why a universal life policy might suit your needs .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover A Toilet Overflow ?
I would have to say that in most cases it would not . Depending on the circumstances that caused the overflow in first place will be a big part of the decision of whether or not a loss like this is covered . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
While not intending to disagree with a colleague , it would be my opinion most homeowners insurance policies should cover a toilet overflow . The most common homeowners policy -LRB- HO-3 or its equivalent -RRB- should cover any accidental direct damage to the dwelling unless there is a specific exclusion or limitation . The accidental escape of water from a plumbing system is a fairly common `` covered '' peril . Granted if a sewer back up originates in a public sewer system or the damage is not sudden , you may have a coverage problem but a simple accidental overflow should not be excluded and therefore `` covered '' . However , I might not consider filing a claim unless the damage is significant.Insurers are quick to increase premiums or non-renew policies following claim activity .
Insurance covers specified perils . Water damage is the result of an event . Everything depends upon what caused the water damage . If the damage is caused by the sudden rupture of water pipes inside the home , the damage is covered by most homeowners policies . If the damage is caused by the overflow of a toilet , the loss would be excluded by most homeowners policies . Incidentally , many insurance companies will provide coverage for the overflowing of a toilet if an extension to coverage is purchased at an increased premium . If the loss is caused by water enter the house from outside it is most likely not going to be covered . Flood insurance , an additional insurance policy is required to cover this type of loss . While it is true that flood damage is not always clear cut , it is important to note that almost one quarter of all property claims involve flood damage in the United States . The purchase of a flood policy is a wise move regardless of where you are located . I have seen desert towns inundated as well as mountain communities . In some places flooding is common .
While not intending to disagree with a colleague , it would be my opinion most homeowners insurance policies should cover a toilet overflow . The most common homeowners policy -LRB- HO-3 or its equivalent -RRB- should cover any accidental direct damage to the dwelling unless there is a specific exclusion or limitation . The accidental escape of water from a plumbing system is a fairly common `` covered '' peril . Granted if a sewer back up originates in a public sewer system or the damage is not sudden , you may have a coverage problem but a simple accidental overflow should not be excluded and therefore `` covered '' . However , I might not consider filing a claim unless the damage is significant.Insurers are quick to increase premiums or non-renew policies following claim activity .
As a rule no , toilet overflow is a maintenance issue . The only time there may be coverage is if the overflow is caused by sewer backup . Some companies will provide coverage for sewer backup , usually as an endorsement on your policy . Check with your agent to find out if your policy has sewer backup coverage .
As long as were not talking about a flood your homeowners insurance policy will cover most water damage . Damage would include for example but not limited to a water or steam pipe suddenly bursting and damaging your dwelling . Wind driven rain would be another example or even overflow of tub , toilet , sink , or washer . The damage must be sudden and accidental .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
There 's nothing worse than a leaking toilet . Oh . Yes there is . When your homeowner 's insurance does n't cover it . Unfortunately , a leaking toilet is usually a maintenance issue due to wear and tear or a malfunction . Therefore , it is not covered on a typical homeowner 's policy . Hopefully , you know a cheap reliable plumber .
Yes , in most instances the ensuing damages would be covered by a standard homeowners policy . Most homeowner policies are considered ` all risk ' meaning that if the loss is not specifically excluded under the policy and it is sudden and accidental in nature , it shall be covered . If there was a problem with the toilet and it malfunctioned causing the water damage , the toilet itself would not be covered but all ensuing water damage should be covered under the policy .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
To claim water damage with your homeowner 's insurance , simply contact your company and explain to them that you have water damage and that you would like to file a claim . But one thing to keep in mind is that not every type of loss associated with water is covered by a homeowner 's policy . Most water losses that are covered happen suddenly -LRB- burst pipe , washing machine overflow , etc. -RRB- and are not from slowly developing things -LRB- slow dripping pipe -RRB- . Things like floods and tidal water are not covered under a homeowner 's policy and require coverage from a separate flood insurance policy . The best thing you can do for a loss related to water is mitigate the damages as quickly as possible , and prevent any further damages from occurring . Thanks for asking !
Not all home owners policies are created equally ! The cause of loss determines if the damage will be covered by the insurance company . Most home owners policies cover a broad range of covered losses . However , some policies only cover `` named perils '' , like fire , wind or hail . Let 's assume you had the broad range . The cause of loss would be next . If the cause was a slow leaking overtime caused by not fixing a leaky pipe then insurance is not designed to cover that . But , if it was a sudden accidental -LRB- not if you took a baseball bat to it in anger -RRB- breaking of the toilet , it would cover the damage in this case . Usually , the damages in the sudden breakage are severe enough that you would not want to self-insure and fix it yourself . Recently , we had a client have a broken toilet causing water damage . It started out as ~ $ 1000 , but as the plumber got into the repairs & replacing the toilet , the water damage had found under the tile , which turned into about $ 8000 . So , we went from not filing to filing a claim . Check with your agent regarding filingthe claim !
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
It depends on the origin and cause of the water . A distinction has to be made between flooding and water damage . A flood is usually caused by external water rising , usually from heavy rain or a river overflowing . Flood is not covered by most homeowner policies . Water damage is generally defined as water hitting your home before touching the outside ground . It can originate from a roof leaf or a broken pipe and is usually covered by homeowners insurance .
Generally speaking , the coverage provided by a Tenants ' Policy is vey similar to that provided by a Homeowners ' Policy . The main difference is that with regard to property coverage , a Renters ' Policy protects YOUR belongings while a Homeowners ' protectes both the home and personal property . Remember that someone else owns your building or unit so they would have coverage for their interests . Water camage is a covered peril in both , though there can certainly be some differences . In a Renters Policy , if rain comes in through an open window , the damage caused to your couch , for example would be covered by your policy . If on the other hand , you made a mistakle and left the water running in the tub and it overflowed , not only would your policy provide coverage for your damages , but the liability portion would provide coverage for your landlord 's interest .
No homeowners insurance will cover flood . This is not to be mistaken with water damage that may occur from a broken pipe in the home or possible overflow from a dishwasher or washing machine . These type of things will be covered if you have a special form HO3 policy . But an actual flood caused by rising water is always excluded and you would need to purchase a flood policy .
If a water line from the dishwasher burst and there is damage to the dwelling then most likely there is coverage . Also potential overflow would be covered . However the pipe that burst if that is the case would not be covered . If the damage has been occurring over a long period of time most likely there would not be coverage . Damage must be sudden and accidental . If you are not sure consult your agent to discuss the specifics of the particular event to see if coverage applies . Also keep in mind your deductible applies so damage must be greater than your homeowners deductible .
Many insurance companies refuse to write a homeowners policy on a home that is near the ocean . The policy normally excludes loss which results from flood , surface water , waves , tidal water , overflow of a body of water or spray , whether driven by wind or not . It is not the intent of most companies to cover damage arising from a Tsunami .
Unfortunately , raised toilet seats are not considered medically necessary by Medicare , and as such , are not covered by Part B under DME . Along with grab bars and other safety features in the bathroom , raised toilet seats are considered a `` personal convenience '' item , therefore do not meet the medically necessary criteria .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Why Is Car Insurance Expensive For Young Drivers ?
Insurance rates are based in large part on experience and driving record . In fact this is who the entire insurance industry operates . There is not questions anewlylicensedoperatorlacks the experience to make the rightdecisionsin certain situations . The insurance industriesexperienceand even my own as an agent show that newly licensed or youthful operator are involved in more accidents . This is why the rates are higher then a driver who has more successful years on the road .
The short answer is that younger and more inexperienced drivers are far more likely to have an accident . Insurance carriers base their rates off of actuarial data using large sample sizes to determine the likelihood that certain factors -LRB- such as youthfulness -RRB- will lead to a claim . In the case of youthful and inexperienced drivers , they have found overwhelmingly that there is a much greater likelihood of a claim than with more experienced drivers .
There are thousands of accidents each day across the nation . These accidents are analyzed in great deal to identify the causes and conditions that lead to accidents . The data is evaluated in close detail and in some states the insurance companies can charge by age and sex . Going to that pile of data , they can determine exactly what it costs to insure a large group of 19 year olds with two years of driving experience . In other states , California being one , you are only allowed to evaluate on driving experience , not age . The important thing is that the rate is based on actuarial data . It isnt that someone has an axe to grind against young drivers . Young drivers simply cost the company more to insure .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
Statistically young drivers present the greatest risk for a claim to an insurance carrier due to their inexperience behind the wheel . Young drivers are more likely to be involved in some sort of questionable or reckless activity . This does mean that every young driver is irresponsible or that they will be involved in activities that will cause a claim . Many young drivers are more responsible and less reckless than older drivers but insurance carriers tend to create rates based on age and geographic location as major factors .
This is not always the case there are some carriers that actually give you young driver discount and also if you have good grades that help . The main reason it is higher is because you are less experienced driver and are more likely to have an accident but there are many factors for this . Also the type of car you drive makes a difference also . I insure a 17 yr old who is on her own policy and has had tickets and drives a 2 door car and with just liability is only $ 160 a month that is not a bad rate as here inMontana the average young driver you can figures is 100 a month before you even think about adding a car this is being added to another policy . My recommendations are to talk to a local agent and see what type of discounts they offer for younger drivers and if you are being listed on another persons policy or not .
The obvious answer is to check with several local insurance agencies for pricing evaluations . Insurance prices are often a serious issue for many families , of course . There is definitive sensitivity to family budgets , However , being driven by the lowest prices is going to result in purchasing low liability limits . Think in terms of each young driver having at least one at-fault accident in the next 12-18 months . Then think how much damage might occur , in each occurrence . Let 's say your first young family driver , due to inattentiveness - -LRB- remember when you were a young driver ? -RRB- - rear-ends a fairly new mid-priced automobile , causing $ 5,000 in damages . Worse , the driver of the other vehicle claims to have sustained neck and back pains , goes to an attorney and starts the process of accumulating medical expenses . Not uncommon at all . Now , add an alleged injured passenger in the car that was rear-ended . Do some quick math as to the possible costs and keep that number in mind when considering how much you might have to pay out-of-pocket , based on the low liability limits that you are weighing , to save money on the premium .
The cheapest car insurance for young will depend on your state and zip code . If you are a Maryland resident and you are between the agesof 16 and 20 , it will be very difficult not impossible to find insurance in the standard market . Some exceptions to this is when the Child goes on Parents Insurance policy . In Maryland , MAIF or the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund insures most young and inexperience drivers or experience driver with accidents and tickets . They must have been declined coverage by at least two standard insurance companies or none renewed by one to qualify for coverage with MAIF . In some cases Progressive may also be good with young drivers but their rates are better if the driver is at least 21 and have good credit score Hope this helps .
Here in CT , one must be at least 16 years of age in order to obtain a drivers license . A 15 year old has the opportunity to obtain a learners ' permit within the regulations of the Department of Motor Vehicles , but does not have to be listed as a driver on the parent 's policy . Other states may be different . Once a young driver receives his or her license , then they need to be listed on their parent 's auto policy as a regular driver in their home with access to their vehicles . If the 16 year old purchases a car of their own and wishes to register in in their own name , then they will need to obtain their own separate auto policy in order to accomplish that . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the laws in your state and the best options available for both you and your young driver .
Health insurance is important because it is the way we finance health care . Health care is expensive with office visits , lab tests , x-rays , and surgery whether inpatient or outpatient . Most people do not have money saved up for medical expenses and therefore purchase health insurance to help pay for medical care . 80 % of Americans spend less than $ 900 annually on medical care and if you are young and healthy you may not think you need health insurance . Health insurance also protects us against large and unexpected medical expenses . The large health care expenses young adults have are usually caused by outdoor activities and sports where injuries can create high medical bills . Those are the main reasons why young adults should purchase health insurance to protect against larger unexpected medical bills .
Many different statistics are analyzed by iInsurance Companies when developing their rate for various classes of drivers . Over the years , it has been fairly typical that those statistics indicated that inexperienced young male drivers have tended to be involved and or responsible for more auto accidents than have their female counterparts . As a result , rates for young men have been generally higher than those for young women . You and your parents should speak with your Insurance Professional about any and all available discounts in order to help you manage the cost of your car insurance . Ask about discounts for good grades , driver education course completion and bundling along with anoy other options they may have to offer .
Generally speaking , yes , car insurance premiums tend to be higher for younger less experienced drivers . Certainly rates can vary between companies , but paying a bit more for your youthful driver should be something for which you plan . Talk to your Insurance Professional about taking advantage of any available discounts . Your company may offer such discounts for your young driver attending and graduating from a Drivers Ed class . Keeping their grades at `` B '' or better may also help . If you have less cars than drivers , your child could qualify for `` Occasional Driver '' rates .
That is an excellent question ! There are many factors that contribute to how the companies set their premium prices . The first thing to know is that insurers are all about the risk . The more risk that they will have to pay out , the higher your premium payment will be . Why ? because they do n't want to collect a couple of payments from you , and get stuck paying out a large sum . So your driving record will be the first thing . Your age and gender will be a factor . Young male drivers are higher risks than middle-aged mom 's , for example , so the young man will likely pay higher premiums than Mom will . What you are driving also plays a part , a sports car or expensive to repair vehicle will cost more than a gently used family car would . A new vehicle verses an older one , for the same reasons . Then there are things like your credit history , and where you live ; and the companies profit margin to consider . There can be more , but these are the big ones that you can count on as factors . I hope that answers your question , thank you for asking !
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
That is a great question ! A lot of people have a hard time with the concept of insurance . I 'm young , nothing will happen to me ! Or I 'm a good driver , why do I need insurance ? But inevitably things do happen . You can be the best driver ever , but that does n't mean the teenager texting in the car behind you is ; or that something can go wrong , and you 're laid up in the hospital . Homeowners is the same way . No one thinks that things will go wrong with their house , why would I want it ? Insurance is there to protect you when things do go wrong . You would not think the insurance was a waste of money when you got the check to replace your belongings , or the one that allows you to pay for the hotel rooms that you are forced into when your home is damaged . Insurance is only a waste of money when you drastically undervalue it . Please consider it as protection , and not a waste . Thanks for asking !
I believe a well-balanced , personalized portfolio is the best for young people . Young people should think about purchasing term insurance due to the fact you can get a lot more for lower premiums . They should also consider whole-life life insurance . Young people should also consider such products as : annuities , long-term care insurance and disability insurance etc. . Term insurance is a good product to cover expenses in case something happens to the young person before the whole-life life insurance has a chance to mature . How many times have young people been killed in car accidents or diagnosed with some form of a terminal illness ? Then the family has to put little jugs and jars around in businesses asking for donations to cover the final expenses and other debts . That is not a time for embarrassing situations like that . That is a time for mourning and for family gathering together . Whole-life life insurance is a great product due to the fact the premiums do not change over the life of the insured . These products , if set up correctly and under current tax laws , allow the insured to pass on a legacy to his heirs tax-free . Annuities are great products for young people to start so they can plan for retirement . When you are ready to retire it is to late to start planning . Long-term care insurance is great in case you need some form of assisted living at any stage of your life . Disability insurance is great in case you get hurt and can not work but you need money for shelter , food and other bills . I am not suggesting you purchase all of these products at one time . I do recommend you meet with a licensed insurance professional and get a good foundation built . Then add to your portfolio over time . Keep in mind these products are generally less expensive when you are young . It is kind of like building a house . You do not want to start with the roof and work down . You should really start with purchasing the land , looking at blueprints , checking out contractors and pulling permits etc. . Then you form the foundation and build upwards towards the roof . To your prosperity .
The best place to start is by talking to your Insurance Professional about your existing car insurance . Ask about any and all available discounts that your company may offer . If you have 2 cars and your daughter will make 3 drivers , she might be elligible for occasional driver rates which can save money . Likewise , her successful completion your state approved Driver Education course and a maintenance of good grades in school can also certainly help keep the premiums down . LIke the rest of us , it is also critical that your young driver follow the rules of the road and operate your car in a lawful and prudent manner in order to avoid tickets and accidents .
Your daughter was not the prominent rating factor for the vehicle . Since you only have two cars and 3 drivers you were rating a spare driver . I would assume the other driver who is not yourself has a impact on the rate . Either a young driver or a driver with some violations may be in play . Actually your agent should be able to look at your policy and easily figure out what is driving the rate . You say she was paying 900.00 for the car she was rated on but actually this would be been inaccurate in the first place . Hard to explain in this type of format . Call your agent to get a better explanation since he or she has details of your policy .
I love CPA 's . They give great accounting advice and some of them even know other things . But the `` minimum limits '' advice defies his training in some important ways . What your son lacks in `` assets '' he more than makes up for in terms of `` potential '' . What I mean here is that he may not have it now , but due to his young age , he 'll have a long time to earn and pay . Even though he is only 18 does not mean that he can not be responsible for an injury or death , or damage to property , and be subjected to an order of the court to garnishee his wage to make reimbursement to those who were injured , killed , or had property damaged . Now , should have have his own insurance ? Assuming he owns the car , he probably needs his own insurance . Staying in the household under household coverage is also OK but some insurers concern themselves with the owner of the car being different than the insured on the policy so proceed with caution when the vehicle is not actually owned by the policyholder . As a practical matter , the discounts that you might enjoy are lost to the child in many cases when they have their own policy . Some companies will extend multi-policy discounts to children of the policy owner . Some discounts do n't come through this connection , however . I like kids learning the responsibility of maintaining their own insurance . It gets the loss off the parents record , for one . Parents can help subsidize the cost if they want and help provide this as a reward for good outcomes on something else . All things said and done , I like responsible children on their own policies but deal with young drivers both on and off the parents policies so it comes down to personal preference and whether you are dealing with issues that poison the whole policy because of the young driver , or not , in many cases .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Long Term Health Insurance A Good Idea ?
Long-term care insurance is probably not a great choice for the very wealthy or the very poor . The very wealthy can self-insure and the very poor would be strapped by the premiums . But for most of middle America , the very reail probability of needing long-term care at some point in their lives , and the very high cost of that care warrants very serious consideration of having a plan of long-term care a part of their portfolio . Medicare pays very little of the cost . Medicaid pays none of the cost if you have assets . And the stresses placed on family to provide that care when it ca n't be paid for are devastating . Talk to a long-term care insurance professional . And check out `` A Shopper 's Guide to Long-Term Care Insurance '' at WEBSITELINK
This is a great question . In my professional opinion I would say absolutely . LTC plans can cover medical and non medical care that you may need . Many people feel that Medicare will pay the cost , NOT TRUE . Medicare covers Skilled Nursing but not non-medical services i.e. help with eating , bathing , dressing , etc. .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
Before buying long term care insurance , it is a good idea to look at the area in which you anticipate you will be living when you reach the age where long term care may be needed , and see what their average rates for assisted living and nursing home care run . Talk to your family and get their ideas on arrangements if that type of care was needed . Review your budget and determine how much you have to spend on long term care , and tell that to your agent when you start . An agent can save you a lot of time and frustration from looking at all kinds of bells and whistles that you can not afford , when they know your budget from the start . These are some things that will help your long term care search start off on a good foot .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
A good time to buy Long Term Care insurance is before you have a serious health condition . LTC rates are based on health , especially the type of ailments that are more common among older people , such as crippling arthritis or stroke . Since the chances of one 's health deteriorating greatly increases in one 's 50 's and 60 's , it is a good idea to purchase Long Term Care Insurance in one 's 50 's , while you can lock in a good rate .
What do annuities invest in ? Well the easiest way to find out is to review the insurance company 's financial statements . This will give you a good idea of where they look to gain returns from . Usually insurance companies are risk adverse with their investment choices and tend to look for long term investments . This is also a reason they have attached such a long surrender window on annuities . The idea is to invest long term for annuities , rather than short term .
To sell long term care insurance all states require a health insurance license . Some states like KY , require you qualify for both life and health insurance , as they do not have a health insurance license stand alone . There are other states like NC , that require a health license and a special long term care certificate with your health insurance license . It is always a good idea to check your resident state 's DOI website for specific requirements .
Is long term insurance a good buy ? Well it all depends on your needs and your assets . The big thing long term care does is provide you a pool of money to help you choose what you want to have happen regarding your care . Without long term care coverage any situation that comes up where you need care , you 'll be faced with where ever will take you and quite possibly a reduction in assets to cover the cost . The idea of long term care being a good buy is strictly in the eye of the beholder . For some it does n't matter and for others it is just a matter of plugging in the right variables to make the plan work best .
In addition to the two excellent reasons Neil gave , I would add that a young person might want to buy Long Term Care insurance if you have a family history of rheumatoid arthritis , multiple sclerosis , diabetes , or other health conditions that increase the chances of needing long term care in the future . It is nearly impossible to get long term care insurance after being diagnosed with some diseases . Getting the coverage while you can is a good idea with any type of insurance that relies on medical underwriting , as Long Term Care insurance does .
It would be best to start Long Term Care Insurance when you are healthy enough to qualify for it and young enough to get lower rates . Also , LTC rates are rising at this time , so it is a good idea to apply before rates go up further . Most experts agree that applying by age 60 , if not sooner , is a good idea .
That is an excellent question ! The first thing that I would tell you is to find a good agent to help you with this . You will want to have a good idea of the value of your belongings , and decide whether it is better for you to pay more , and get replacement value -LRB- paid for new -RRB- or pay less , and get actual value -LRB- paid , but minus age and depreciation values -RRB- . You will also want to have an idea of whether you have a collection , or items that might need to be specially insured . Again , a good agent can help you with those decisions . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
When your Term Life Insurance ends , the price of the Term coverage usually jumps way up in price . After this , the rate can go up every year , so most people choose to get a new policy . However , they must be medically able to get a new policy , and their rates will be based on their new age , usually causing the new policy to cost substantially more than the one whose term just ended . If health has declined since purchasing the original Term policy , it may be a good idea to convert the Term insurance to permanent . This must be done within a certain time frame . The new rates will be based on current age , and the product that you can convert to may not be the product that you would prefer . But converting does not require evidence of good health , so is a good way to get coverage when other doors are closed .
Long Term Disability Insurance is a good idea if your income is needed to maintain a decent quality of life for yourself or your family . Everyone suffers when there is a disability , and even Disability Insurance does not replace 100 % of the income lost , so there is always going to be some hardship involved with becoming disabled . But if your being off work for more than a few months would cause your home mortgage to go unpaid , or cause your spouse to have to go back to work , or something else that would divert your family from some basic goals , then having Disability Insurance might be a good idea for you .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com today , and here 's our question : is converting my term life insurance policy to a permanent policy a good idea ? Well remember , most people buy their term insurance because they 're buying it for a time certain event 10 years , 15 years , 20 years . Sometimes life changes and all of the sudden liabilities and obligations that I thought were going to be terminal now become permanent . I want to make sure when I buy my term insurance contract that I have convertibility and that that convertibility allows me to go to a really good permanent portfolio , so all of the sudden if I need to change and I need to make a maneuver , I may have to convert my term to perm because my obligations and liabilities have changed . That 's why you need to look at a good term contract that has convertibility options and a good window to convert to a good quality permanent policy . Well , that 's our consumer quest ion for today . If you have any questions just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The amount of monthly or daily benefit that you buy in long term care insurance depends on assets that you have to go towards long term care insurance costs and the rates at long term care facilities in your area . You can get a good idea of average rates by contacting a few facilities to know roughly what they charge in your area .
I am not real clear on your question . Do you have disability insurance either on your own or through an employer you wish to supplement ? If this is the case there are some things to keep in mind . First disability insurance policies coordinate with each other . The benefits to you can not exceed the limits of the policies combined . For instance , one policy will pay up to 67 % and the other policy will pay up to 70 % of your current income . If your limit is $ 5,000 per month the very best thing to happen would be the terms may last longer by having a bigger `` pot of money '' in your benefit bank . If you are looking for a supplement to cover a long elimination period and you can afford it , then it may be a good idea . If your long term policy has a 180 day elimination period , you may need a short term policy with benefits as early as 7 days but only up to 180 days when the long term policy is met . Sit down with your trusted advisor to work out your details to avoid paying premiums with no benefits because of those limits . I am always available to help as well . Good luck !
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Will Car Insurance Cover Car Seat ?
Car insurance will , for the most part , cover for physical loss or damage to your car for a fairly wide rage of causes . This is , however , for the most part limited to the car as it came off the manufacturer 's line including any components that are permanently installed . So , if your car has a car seat that was permanently installed by the manufacturer , then it would be covered as part of the car . If , however , as in most cases , it is portable and installed by use of the belt system , then the car policy would provide no coverage . You would , however find coverage for it as personal property under your Homeowners , Condo Unit Owners ' or Rental Insurance policy .
Car insurance will , for the most part , cover for physical loss or damage to your car for a fairly wide rage of causes . This is , however , for the most part limited to the car as it came off the manufacturer 's line including any components that are permanently installed . So , if your car has a car seat that was permanently installed by the manufacturer , then it would be covered as part of the car . If , however , as in most cases , it is portable and installed by use of the belt system , then the car policy would provide no coverage . You would , however find coverage for it as personal property under your Homeowners , Condo Unit Owners ' or Rental Insurance policy .
When you are renting a car , look at the following coverage options : 1 . Liability - make sure you opt in for the 3rd liability insurance . This will cover other party physical damage and injuries in case of an accident . 2 . Car Physical damage - this is the coverage for the vehicle you rent . Usually it bears $ 0 deductible and covers from a first dollar on . 3 . PIP - or personal injury protection - if you drive with other people seating in car , this will provide coverage to your passengers . Other optional coverage offered by rental companies may include : 1 . Personal property : luggage , cellphones , computers etc. . Usually limited to a set by the rental company amount . 2 . Death : provides limited coverage for accidents involving death of passengers in the rental car .
If you auto has a child safety seat and is involved in an auto accident then the insurance company will replace the child seat . The reason for this is the safety of the seat may have been compromised in the accident . This is a question all claims adjusters will ask when the claim is taken .
It does n't but I guess it really should . Babies are more of a driving distraction than cell phones . Those little muchhkins have all the noise distractions of a loud car radio combined with the visual distractions similar to texting while driving . Plus they can assult your sense of smell and even throw unsavory things at the driver . If things were truely fair , babies would raise your insurance rates ... but they do n't . IF you have the correct car seats and always use them , you should never have a rate up for having a baby . Better off ... leave them home with dad or grandma and keep your eyes on the road .
Imagine that I own a brand new Corvette and you own a five year old Fiat . Would you want to pay the same amount for auto insurance as me ? What if I only drove my car on Sundays and only went 20 miles and always had my mother in the seat with me , while you drove 700 miles a week on foggy dangerous roads . Should we pay the same amount ? But my mother is a previous race car driver and has three moving violations in the past 30 days . You have a perfect driving record . Should we pay the same amount ? I dont call that discrimination , I call that adjusting the risk . The insurance company calls it underwriting .
Unfortunately , raised toilet seats are not considered medically necessary by Medicare , and as such , are not covered by Part B under DME . Along with grab bars and other safety features in the bathroom , raised toilet seats are considered a `` personal convenience '' item , therefore do not meet the medically necessary criteria .
If your father has a Humana Medicare Advantage Plan I feel confident in telling you the answer to your question is No . If your father has a Medicare Supplement policy he may get Medicare under Part B to pay some on his chair . Certainly not the whole cost of the chair . Medicare will only cover the seat lift mechanism not the chair itself . In order for Medicare to pay for the seat lift mechanism the doctor prescribing the chair must justify to Medicare that the lift chair is medically necessary . That is easier said than done with Medicare .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
This is a discount on your auto insurance that refers to your seat belt and air bags in your vehicle . There are many other discounts that carriers provide for your auto insurance rates . Some carriers provide discounts for alarm systems , ant-lock brakes , automatic traction control , and radar sensing systems -LRB- very new technology -RRB- just to name a few .
Geri chairs are high backed chairs with adjustable seating and smaller wheels than a traditional wheelchair . Some people can not tolerate standard wheelchairs because they need more back support in order to sit up . In those cases , Medicare will often pay for a geri chair under the durable medical equipment benefit .
Western human behavior is to live for the moment . And with so many cultural expectations that cost money , retirement funded takes a back seat to immediate gratification . Retirement seems so far away for the Millennial generation that it 's almost unreality . But many baby boomers have discovered that time waits for no man and retirement is suddenly upon you and staring you in the face .
The discount applies to the Personal Injury Protection or Medical Payments coverage available on your auto policy . Some states require such coverage and others do not . Talk to your Insurance Professional about your particular policy to see if you have the coverage or not . If available , the discount is applied because your car is outfitted with drivers side or full compartment air bags or automatic seat belts . There may be other discounts available if your car is equipped with other safety features like anti lock breaks and the like . Again talk to your insurance professional about this to be sure you are receiving all available discounts .
what is the best type of life insurance for young people ? In my opinion dividend paying whole life is the best choice for young people who have not yet put themselves in such debt that the option of whole life has to take a back seat to debt protection . For young people whole life is a great choice as the price is cheap , the benefit is large and the price is locked in . It is the absolute best window of opportunity to take advantage of what whole life can do .
I believe Medicare can help pay for a lift chair , if there 's a medical necessity -LRB- for those with severe hip or knee arthritis , or a neuromuscular disease , and can not get up from a seated position to stand on their own -RRB- , as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- under your Medicare Part B insurance . Part B would pay 80 % of the cost and you would be responsible for the remaining 20 % . I 'd recommend calling Medicare to get more specific input .
The Affordable Care Act aka `` Obamacare '' was passed by an act of Congress and signed into law by the President . At this point , it has very little to do anymore which who may be the seated President in the future . Numerous attempts have ben made to challenge portions of the law in the courts and it has withstood these challenges . It appears that if it were to be repealed or altered in anyway , it would once again have to be as a result of an act of Congress . Provded that the action had enough support to avoid a future President 's veto power , that Congressional action could change the law as we now know it . Hope that helps .
Retirement can thought of as a time of change . It is more than your job and paycheck stopping or the selling of your company . Retirement It is a event or at the very least transition . What happens if you do not plan and simply fly by the seat of your pants ? You probably will have income problems or end up paying more tax because of the lack of planning . There is of course the non monetary side . What are you going to do with the rest of you life after `` retirement ? . No plan then you may not like how things turn out . If you have more questions you can contact me . Start with my web site www.jpw.ca if you prefer .
Great question ! The answer to that will most likely hinge on the mid-term elections this fall . There is one party that believes that Medicare is a handout , and that it can not properly be funded , so it needs to be drastically cut . The other party agrees that funding is an issue , and with nearly 10,000 seniors turning 65 every day , and with many of them not covered by insurance through a workplace , it certainly will become a bigger issue . The party that wins the majority of seats in Congress this fall will probably tip the scales in their favor . Assuming things stay the same , Professor Michael Granof , Professor of Economics at the University of Texas says Medicare will be bankrupt by 2023 , and Social Security about ten years later . His statistical analysis of retirement aged seniors is quite sobering . If you would like the link to his lecture , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to share it with you . Thanks for asking !
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Are you kidding me ? You can say that for all individuals from all income levels , with different concerns that a term policy or a spousal trust would always be a better option ? First of all anyone who qualifies any insurance policy structuring by referencing the total population of current and potential policy holders and does not give you a mixed message then they do not fully understand or do not care to fully answer the question as to the benefits or drawbacks of a policy -LRB- assuming that they are not basing their statement in the fact that the policy structuring will be eliminated/or significantly compromised by federal regulations -RRB- . First of all I am including Indexed Universal Life under the whole life product line , some professionals like to clearly separate the different options , which can serve a purpose . However I will assume a limited working knowledge of life insurance structuring regarding the average consumer who would be asking this as the first question that they would like to address once they take a seat in ones office . That being said most people who have not been educated or taught themselves the life insurance market are only familiar with Term and Whole . At very least it is a good place to start as those looking for final expense plans have no interest and are not going to benefit from hearing about all of the whole life policy structurings , and a individual who is trying to figure out how they can reduce estate taxes , avoid taxes for surpassing federal and possible state gifting limits they do n't have any interest in term life and are probably going to be using life insurance along with setting up a or several trusts to help them meet their need . If you already have a standard whole life policy and your goal when purchasing the policy was maximizing distributions to beneficiaries than I would say that the majority of policy holders that fit into that criteria would be best off leveraging the equity in their policy to meet their `` borrowing '' needs . This is also assuming that the policy has been in force long enough to establish a respectable cash value -LRB- depending on the policy , the premiums paid and the interest rates a rough estimate would be 8 years from the policy issue before you would consider borrowing from the policy except for in a emergency -RRB- . Basically the most efficient way to borrow from such a policy would be using the cash value in the policy as collateral -LRB- as you would a car or a house -RRB- on a bank loan . This will give you the most options to shop around for the best interest rates and will simplify the entire process for you . Right now Indexed Universal Life policies are dominating the market . They can be a little more complex and confusing . However they are seeing such widespread growth because of their interest rate structuring , and because they serve as fantastic duel purpose policies . By purchasing a policy with a face amount that is appropriate for your needs but far less then you had initially had in mind the policy will accumulate a significant cash value that can be used as a college fund , a retirement fund , or many other situations . One would generally want to plan on contributing to the policy for a specific amount of time before they will be requiring the distributions . But the amount of time you will want to give the policy to grow the cash value will depend on your needs , if you want to use if to provide a extra $ 40,000 annually to supplement your post retirement stream financial goals for 20 years then it will probably have to grow for about 25 years . If on the other hand you are just looking to find the most beneficial way to structure a college fund that will only be making distributions for 4-6 years then one can achieve this in a far smaller time frame , by the way I personally have funded my daughters higher expense costs from a IUL policy and I think that they are very often the best option , a professional with your best interest motivating their actions will always look into the options run calculations and then present you with your options and empirically show evidence that supports their value statement and product comparison . That 's all I am going to say except if one does not believe in cash value policies then what do they purpose as a better way to maximize transfers of wealth . - Christopher J. Lawrence Christopher@Lawrence-Financial-Consulting.com
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Lost Food During A Power Outage ?
Renters insurance like homeowners insurance will typically provide some coverage for food loss due to interruption of electrical service or mechanical breakdown . The dollar amounts of this coverage canvary from company or policy to policy . Always read over your policy completely to know what coverages it provides or call your local agent to discuss the specific coverages offered in your policy .
-- > Normal 0 In the spirit of every reasonable insurance question is deserving of an answer , I submit . Tenant Homeowner or Renters policies cover damage to your personal property and food certainly would be considered Personal Property . As long as the power outage was caused by one of the named perils in your policy -LRB- fire , lightning , wind , vehicle damage , etc. -RRB- and it occurred on your premises , you may have a valid claim for food spoiled as a result of a power outage . But if the power outage was caused by something that occurred away from your residence , most Renters policies specifically exclude that type of loss unless the power outage then causes covered damage to your residence . Remember however , most Renters policies have a deductible of $ 250 or more so make sure you take that into consideration . Add to that the effect submitting a small claim , one less than $ 1000 , could have on your future premium or the willingness of your insurance company to renew your coverage . It may be a good idea to pass on submitting this type of claim even though you may have some coverage . In addition , most policies require you to take reasonable steps to preserve your property following a loss . Make sure you have done what you can to prevent your food from spoiling following a power outage . Some policies include a number of additional coverages , often an effort to make one companys policy appear more attractive than another . These additional coverages provide nominal amounts of insurance covering specific loss situations such as key replacement or food spoilage . Here again , you may be tempted to submit a claim because you have coverage but consider the impact a claim might have on future premiums and renewal terms . You may be better served to simply replace the food . When an event like this occurs , try to recall why you purchased insurance in the first place . More than likely , it wasnt to reimburse you if the food in your refrigerator went bad .
If the food spoilage is a result of a covered peril then yes the food would be covered in most cases . For example , a major windstorm causes a power outage for an extended period of time . As long as reasonable efforts were made to conserve the food it would most likely be covered subject to your deductible . Since most people carry a $ 500 or $ 1000 deductible it may not be to your advantage to turn in a claim if that is all that is lost . Most people do not have that much spoilable food in their refrigerator and freezer .
It may , yes , but it is important to check with your Insurance Professional and discuss the terms and conditions of your particular policy . In general , if food items are lost from a refrigerator or freezer as a result of a long term power outage AND the cause of that power outage is a covered peril in your policy , then there will be some coverage . I have seen that in most cases , the amount of coverage is limited , usually to about $ 500.00 and of course this is subject to your deductible .
It may , yes , but talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Many Homeowners ' policies offer some limited coverage for lost food items in a freezer or refrigerator that is caused by a long term power outage . The outage , of course , must be caused by a covered peril like a storm for example . The loss would also be subject to your property deductible in many cases .
It may , but of course , check with your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Assuming there is coverage , it must be caused by a covered peril . In CT , the most common cause is extended power outage caused by a storm or ice build up that causes tree limbs to snap and take down power lines . In those cases , most policies do provide some limited coverage for food lost from freezers and refrigerators , usually up to $ 500.00 . This is , of course , subject to your deductible .
Yes it does . If you suffer such a loss as a result of a direct or indirect lightening strike , for example , then any damage to your electrical system , well pump , appliances and even in some cases , lost food out of your freezer and refrigerator should be covered . This last one , of course , would be a result of a long term power outage .
Renter 's insurance policies typically do not cover power outages since most of the resulting damage -LRB- if any -RRB- would apply to the structure . However , it is possible that you may have some coverage to spoiled food from a refrigerator losing power . However , appliances that no longer work is generally not covered . You should always , however , ask your broker .
Yes , unless specified otherwise by your contract , Lightening damage is typically included as a covered peril an Homeowners policies . Naturally , any related damage is subject to your deductible so you need to read your policy and check with your insurance professional about your particular situation . Damage to your home , electrical system , appliances and electronics are all covered under this provision . If you suffer a long term power outage as a result , be sure to ask your insurance professional about coverage for contaminated food in your freexer and or refrigerator , too .
Most homeowners insurance polices will have coverage with a limitation on food spoilage of about $ 200.00 due to a sudden surge or power outage . This amount and how the spoilage is covered can vary so I recommend you read your policy or double check with your insurance provider .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy , but many Home Insurance Companies include some limited food spoilage coverage in their contracts . The loss must be as a result of a long term power outage caused by a covered peril -LRB- severe storm for example -RRB- . The coverage is usually limited to a specific dollar amount and is , of course , subject to your property deductible .
In many cases , food spoilage that is a result of a long term power outage is covered by your Homeowners ' insurance . It is possible that the coverage may be limited to about $ 500.00 . The loss is subject to your deductible . When there is a storm approaching , in order to help to get your possible claim handled as quickly as possible , conducting an inventory of your refrigerator and freezer , as well as paking pictures can certainly be a benefit .
If food is spoiled because power to a residence is lost , the renters policy does not provide coverage . If it is spoiled because of damage to the interior of the residence caused by a covered peril , then the policy will probably provide coverage . If the food is spoiled because it was mishandled or out of date , then of course , there isnt any coverage .
There is exclusion in most homeowners policy for power interruption that is caused outside the residence . The damages sustained in such a power interruption would normally not be covered . If the power outage was due to something that happened inside the residence the spoilage would probably be covered .
If you loose food out of our refrigerator or freezer as a result of a long term pwe outage that is caused by a covered peril in your Homeowners ' Policy , then more than likely you do have some coverage . Of course it is generally subject to your deductible .
Hotels are covered under commercial insurance . A homeowners policy is a package made for personal lines insurance . Neither a commercial policy nor a homeowners routinely provides coverage for a power outage that occurs off site . If the centricity company is at fault , they are the ones that need the insurance .
Generally speaking , yes , a standard `` all risk '' Homeowners policy would cover damage resulting from a lightening strike . Certainly damage to your house itself , but also that caused by the sudden electrical surge through either power or cable lines that might damage or destroy appliances or other components would all be covered under your homeowners ' policy . IN addition , if the electrical storm knocks your poer out and you arein teh dark for several days , in many cases your homeowners ' policy would also pay to replace lost food items out of your regrigeratorand freezer .
Possibly yes and possibly no ! The question that needs to be answered is how the water got there . If the water is ground water entering the home thru doors and windows , only flood insurance , NOThomeowners insurance , covers the resultant damage . And even with flood insurance the coverage is very limitedin areas of the home below grade . If the source of the water is seepage thru cracks in the foundation there is no coverage . If the source of the water is sump pump failure , whether by power outage , mechanical failure or simply being overwhelmed , you will need to have optional coverage available from many insurers . The same for the source of the water being a back up of the sewer system . If the source of the water is overflow from above , such a burst washer hose or clogged commode , there would likely be coverage . You will want to consult your insurance professional for a detailed review of the coverage you have and/or need .
When food spoils because of a covered loss , then it will be considered in the claim . If food in your freezer spoils because of a fire in your residence , that loss could become part of the claim . If the food spoilage is the result of power interruption outside your home , that loss would be excluded . If the food spoils because of negligence , that loss would also be excluded .
There can be several reasons that food would spoil . If it is owner neglect , then it wont be a covered loss . If it is the result of power interruption and the interruption is outside the building then it will not be covered . If it is the result of a power interruption because of some covered event such as fire , inside the premises then it will probably be covered .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Do They Draw Blood For Life Insurance ?
Life insurance is a mortality product priced on the actuarial assumptions of life expectancy . Testing several blood indicators can establish a baseline of underwriting debits or credits that are calculated in determining an offer . A Blood panel is created to with basic norms in the blood analysis report that the proposed insured can obtain upon request .
Depending on the coverage requested a paramed exam may be required . Since the blood is the primary means by which a body is fed , it can reveal a lot about what is going on internally with a person . Although there are a variety of tests that can be run on a blood sample , most Insurance companies are looking for conditions that may affect insurability . It can also help the proposed insured to discover just whats going on with them internally . There are times when healthy blood levels can elevate a person 's health status with the proposed insured company -LRB- from standard to preferred -RRB- depending on how the initial application was written .
Life insurance companies will draw blood depending on the amount of insurance . They will check for HIV or Aids , nicotine , drugs , diabetes , liver problems and other health issues that affect mortality . This helps the company underwrite the policy properly to determine the proper rating -LRB- premium -RRB- and insurability of the proposed insured . .
Blood is drawn at the paramed exam for a medically underwritten life insurance policy so that you can be tested for cholesterol , HIV , liver disease , triglycerides , blood sugar , and other conditions . This helps the life insurance underwriter determine your life insurance rating , which in turn , dictates what premium you will pay .
Why do they take blood and urine for life insurance ? Because tests on both blood and urine provide a wealth of information about a person 's current health . Just as your regular doctor would do , the labs produced from these two draws provide information on organ function levels , blood sugars , cholesterol and other body chemistries . Sort ofa snapshot of your health on a given day .
You can secure life insurance coverage even with high blood pressure . Assuming there are no other medical items , managed high blood pressure under the care of a doctor can be underwritten quite favorably . And keep in mind that some carriers draw a distinction between hyper tension and high blood pressure , i.e do n't define yourself ... your doctor will do that for you .
Underwriting to obtain life insurance may require a small blood draw for testing , but that is only on the original application . Guaranteed acceptance and usually smaller benefit policies do not require blood or urine samples . The greater the risk to the insurance company , that is the more benefit amount applied for , the more underwriting requirements there are including blood and urine samples and possibly an EKG . Age also plays into it .
Good points y' all ... What was the desired answer from the question ... The exam for GETTING life insurance -LRB- there has n't been an exam for health insurance in most states for YEARS . Now with PPACA , there are no exams for sure -RRB- . or ... the exam to get a license ? Since this site is for people to ask questions about insurance products & coverage , I assume it was NOT about getting licensed . For life insurance , the exam , or lack thereof , depends on the carrier & the amount you are applying for . The same person would have a light exam -LRB- small blood draw , tinkle in a cup , blood pressure reading , & questions -RRB- for a lower benefit amount -LRB- like 100K - 250K -RRB- vs. a larger benefit amount of 1 million . Think of it this way , `` The more you want from them , the more they 'll want from you . '' :--RRB- There are carriers that offer `` no exam '' underwriting options . MOST of these plans are for smaller amounts -LRB- under 250K -RRB- . The underwriting is typically pretty quick . The process can be as little as a few days . The tradeoff for not probing as deeply into you -LRB- literally -RRB- is that the cost of insurance is higher . You are likely to get the same coverage for less if you are willing to take an exam . Compare the length of coverage , extra coverage like Living Benefits , the convenience factor -LRB- exam or no exam -RRB- , the underwriting possibilities appetite of the carrier -LRB- your agent should discuss WHY this carrier is best over others - - the reason should be `` best underwriting for YOU '' -RRB- , and THEN the rate . Rates are relative to what you can qualify for . DO N'T fall for the big `` Dot coms '' that say you can get 500K for $ 20 a month ... MOST of use can not get that . If you have any questions , please reach out !! - gravy
Your social security number and the medicare # will be the same except for the alphabetical character added to the medicare number . Why the alphabetical character ? If you are drawing benefits under your social security record -LRB- earnings -RRB- the alphabet character is A . So your social security number would be displayed XXX-XX-XXXXA . What if you are drawing your benefit coverage under your divorced husbands benefit or your husband 's benefit - that al ; habetical character changes to reflect the beneficiary you are drawing your benefit under
Not specifically . That said your life insurance exam results can be altered by the consumption of alcohol prior to the blood and urine draws . Blood sugars and other body chemistry can be altered by the consumption of alcohol in the hours prior . Enough so that a person could lose 2 or 3 levels of classifications which in turn would mean a much much higher cost . If this situation occurs , most companies will give an applicant another chance at their expense to clear up the test results . It is always wise not to `` over do '' anything the night prior to testing .
Medical exams for life insurance underwriting will have different requirements depending on the age of the insured , the amount of coverage applied for , and the type of policy . There are Guaranteed acceptance policies that do n't require an exam at all . Usually they have some medical questions and the max coverage is low . Typically for up to a few hundred thousand dollars of coverage the requirement is just a small blood draw and urine sample along with blood pressure readings and medical questions . Larger benefit amounts may require an EKG etc. .
It depends on the amount applied for and the applicant 's age . The older the applicant , the smaller the amount applied for that triggers the requirement for a blood profile . Along with a blood draw , a urine specimen may be a part of the underwriting requirement . The insurance company usually pays for the test .
A life insurance physical exam is also known as a paramed exam . This is an underwriters opportunity to take a snap shot of an applicant 's current health . A nurse or paramed examiner will come to you and take a health history and perform a few tests . Some of the most common include height , weight , blood pressure , urinalysis , blood draw , mouth swab and pulse . Depending on age and amount of insurance they can require more testing such as an EKG . The paramed examiner submits the report and findings to the underwriter to compare to medical history and doctors records . You will find with underwritten life insurance plans this is a very common practice and is paid for with your normal life insurance premiums . Therefore there is no out of pocket charge for applying .
We get this question a lot here at The Medigap Market . Your medicare number will always consist of you or your spouses social security number with a letter at the end indicating any number of different statuses . If you have a letter T -LRB- Temporary -RRB- in your medicare number it means that you are not currently drawing social security payments . If and when you do begin drawing social security payments the T will be replaced by a letter A indicating you are the primary beneficiary drawing benefits under your social security number . In case you did n't already know , if you are not drawing social security your medicare part B premium will be billed to you quarterly and if you are drawing social security your Part B premium will be deducted automatically from your check every month .
A life insurance physical is usually misrepresented as a paramedic exam . First , if a physical is required by the company you are applying at , thwn they would send a medical or you could be sent to one , to have a physical completed similar to an annual physical . A paramedical is where a technician is sent to your home , place of work , or another setting you agree upon , where he/she will ask a medical questions which the insurance company wants answers to . Blood pressure , a blood draw , urine in a cup , and measurements will also usually happen . It really all depends on the company , your age , and how much you are applying for .
Yes , but it depends on which state you live in as some states restrict these types of plans . Something to keep in mind when dealing with the purchase of insurance is the fewer questions an insurance company asks , the more expensive the policy will be . Skipping a examination means fewer questions , which comes back to price , which would be higher . I should also address what 95 % of an insurance `` physical '' involves . A medical examiner -LRB- usually a nurse -RRB- meets with you at your home or another place that works for you , They will take your blood pressure , check your pluse , have you step on a scale , ask about your medical history , draw some blood and collect a urine sample . Usually takes about 35 minutes or so . In cases involving large face amounts and an older client , a full medical exam may be done . It is also worthwhile to note that the cost of these exams are picked up by the insurance carrier .
I am presuming that you are asking about tests for illegal drug consumption and not just prescription medications in general . As far as health insurance goes this is a non-issue . An applicant for health insurance is not subjected to any physical exams or blood or urine tests as a condition for being offered health insurance coverage . While in the past there may have been questions regarding illegal drug usage on a health insurance application that if answered truthfully by a drug user could have resulted in their being declined for coverage in the individual health insurance market we have moved past that now . As the Affordable Care Act prohibits medical underwriting and requires policies to be guaranteed to be issued regardless of pre-existing conditions there are no such questions to be answered now . Ironically , in the individual health insurance marketplace the only drug that you can be asked about and perhaps penalized for in the form of higher premiums is for tobacco use . No questions are asked about marijuana , cocaine or other drugs . This is different from applying for life insurance where in many cases a physical exam that may include drawing blood and/or taking a urine sample are part of the underwriting process . With the expanded number of states that have approved marijuana for medical usage and the outright legalization that Colorado and Washington are now experimenting with the life insurance industry is having to adjust to this changing legal environment in their underwriting practices . Different life insurance carriers are addressing the marijuana usage issue in different ways so there is no universal standard being applied to this issue and it is an area where a great deal of evolution is currently underway and probably will be for years to come .
This is a great question ! I like it especially because it shows that you are carefully considering before buying . That is wisdom . This type of policy is often hyped with big numbers about what it will generate for you . The reality is far too often something different . I do not recommend these policies for my clients , and here 's why . There is very little risk on the part of the insurance company . You will bear the majority of it . Are you a skilled investor ? You are expected to be , by the insurer . Are you able to spend time watching the performance of your policy investments ? Because if you are expecting a policy that you can buy and throw in a drawer and forget about , this is n't one of them . Your premium payments need to be enough to cover the cost of the insurance , which rises steadily as the policy ages . If your investments do n't do well , you are expected to increase your payments to compensate for the losses your policy is taking . If you are n't doing that , your policy draws from the cash value it may or may not have generated . It cannibalizes itself until there is no money to cover costs , and it lapses . There are very few guarantees in this type of policy . Most will only guarantee you will have coverage for twenty years . This makes them little more than very expensive term policies . Can they generate large cash values ? Yes . Can they lose money , and go belly up , costing you years of payments ? Yes . Are you someone that is okay with trying to make this work ? If so , then this may be a policy for you . In my opinion , they are a great way for agents and insurers to make a lot of money at your expense , and that is not my way of doing business . I do not sell them , nor do I recommend them , as I do not believe in their viability as a life insurance vehicle for most people . I hope that helps , and I 'd be happy to discuss it further with you , if you 'd like to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Yes , there are companies like that . I use one carrier that will allow you to use a mouth swab , vs drawing blood , for face amounts up to $ 1,000,000 . Please use the Contact Me feature on this website if you would like to discuss obtaining a policy through that company .
For the most part , when applying for Life Insurance , there are questions on the application that relate to smoking and the use , or past use , of tobacco products . IN addition , it is pretty common practice to include a paramedic review and visit and they may conduct an oral swab or be required to draw a blood sample and or urine specimen for lab analysis . If an attending physician 's report is needed for underwriting , they will also be requested . The Life Insurance company will learn if you are a current tobacco user .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Is A Life Insurance Policy ?
Life insurance pricing is determined by age , health and type of policy . The cost is called your premium . Charges for insurance are different than costs . There are also two person policies called survivorship life insurance which reduces thecostsof a one person policy with the same insurance benefit . But your health , your age and the type of polciy you buy determine your premium and thus your cost .
The cost of life insurance varies widely with the amount of coverage , the type of policy , and the age and health of the applicant . To find out what the lowest priced policies would be for someone with your age and health , you can go to a website that offers `` instant '' quotes . The rate will come up and you can change the variable to see what different types and face amounts would cost . Keep in mind that your rate could be higher based on your health and other risk factors .
The smallest premium I have seen for a life insurance policy is $ 15 . The highest is in the millions . The amount of coverage that you can get for any given premium amount depends on your age , health history , tobacco use , gender , height-weight , etc. . Your independent agent will give you rates for many companies and help you understand which companies will approve you .
Life Insurance is a mortality product . Individual life insurance is priced based on your mortality . Your mortality is calculated based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history , and current medical condition . There are also additional items that impact mortality like motor vehicle violations , hazardous vacation or recreational activities . There are two types of life insurance : term and permanent . Depending on the length of coverage will impact the premium as well .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
Some agents may say that 5 % -LRB- or maybe 7 % and even up to 10 % -RRB- of your annual earnings should be allocated toward life insurance premiums . This is dependent on individual circumstances and one of the first things you need to identify when looking for individual life insurance . In figuring out your life insurance needs , you should determine how much life insurance death benefit your beneficiaries will require . Then shop and compare quotes to get an idea of how much that amount life insurance coverage will be . Budgeting and planning for how much you want to allocate toward life insurance is important . To manage your life insurance policies efficiently reassess your need for life insurance every two to three years .
That 's an interesting question - do you mean how much coverage do you need to purchase to ensure the value of your belongings are covered adequately , or how much should the policy have paid out to you after your claim was processed ? In the case of coverage , you would need to have an idea of how much value there is to be insured . For example , do you have a lot of electronics , or jewelry ? If so , you would need more coverage than someone who has very few of those things . If you meant how much should you have received , that depends on a lot of things specific to your policy and claim . If you would like more information , I 'd be happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Taxed In Texas ?
Life insurance in Texas is not taxed for income tax , in most situations . Life insurance proceeds do fall under the value of the estate if the policy owner is the deceased , and the one with the estate . If his/her spouse is no longer alive , federal estate taxes will be charged on the excess about the exempted amount , which is $ 5,250,000 in 2013 . Texas does not have a state estate tax at this time .
Life insurance in Texas is not taxed for income tax , in most situations . Life insurance proceeds do fall under the value of the estate if the policy owner is the deceased , and the one with the estate . If his/her spouse is no longer alive , federal estate taxes will be charged on the excess about the exempted amount , which is $ 5,250,000 in 2013 . Texas does not have a state estate tax at this time .
You will need a new vehicle registration in Texas and with it a new Texas policy . there are honestly some differences in coverage that are routine in Texas and not so much in Georgia . For example in Texas you typically can buy PIP which is Personal Injury Protection which affords you and your passengers some coverages including wage loss that are not usually offered in GA. . In Ga most folks have medical payments coverage in lieu of PIP . It is not the same but is more limited . Keep in mind that much of auto insurance revolves around complying with state law . The DMV in both states gets a data feed form the companies on policies as they incept and as they are cancelled . With the situation you describe I think our agency may uniquely able to assist you . We currently are licensed in both states and can assist with your transition . So give us a call 1 - 866-933-4372
The Texas Health Insurance Exchange was created to give Texas residents the opportunity to purchase affordable medical coverage from the top insurers in the state . Open Enrollment will begin October 1 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and policies will be effective in 2014 . Texas consumers can buy single , family and small business healthcare through the Exchange or with the help of experienced licensed brokers -LRB- and websites -RRB- . The new federal tax subsidy could possibly reduce premiums for persons that qualify . The `` Federal Poverty Level '' will be used to calculate eligibility and amount of the subsidy . Licensed and/or experienced brokers can also assist with this calculation .
You can also go to the website for the Social Security Administration at www.SSA.gov for information and to sign up . One important thing to remember when signing up for Medicare in Texas is that you have a one time open enrollment period when you first sign up for Medicare Part B . This means there are no health underwriting questions and you can select any Medicare Supplement plan available . Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of your medical costs . The Medicare Supplement is designed to cover the remaining 20 % or some variation depending on what plan you go with . We have helped many clients through the Medicare Supplement process in Texas . You can compare Texas Medicare Supplement Plans instantly on our website at SummitMedigap.com or give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
Yes typically it is covered and covered on a replacement cost basis . Due to the frequency of major hail and windstorms in several states , we are seeing several companies offer only Actual cash value for older rooftops . So be sure you understand what your coverage is and how it will respond to a hail or windstorm -LRB- tornado or hurricane -RRB- . In some state per cent deductibles have been in use for decades such as in Texas . However much of the country has dollar amount deductibles . Also be aware that coverage is not automatically available in the voluntary market in all areas of coastal states So if you live in the fourteen counties in Texas along the Gulf or in Florida every where , you may have to obtain wind and hail coverage through a residual market mechanism such as the Texas Wind Insurance Association or Citizens Property Insurance in FL . A local agent in any coastal state should be a good starting point to understand what is available and where in your part of the country .
Generally speaking yes . Windstorm is covered by your homeowners policy , but maybe treated separately by your policy as well . For example if you live in a coastal area wind coverage may be excluded and you obtain what coverage is available through a pooling arrangement such as a wind pool . For Example if you live in Galveston Texas you might you need three policies where as an inland customer would only need one.In Galveston your wind policy might be through the Texas Wind Insurance Association , your regular homeowners policy in the private market -LRB- exclusive of wind -RRB- . You may also be required to have a flood policy -LRB- from the National Flood Insurance Program -RRB- because your insurer does not want to see you in a dilemma of having one group say the damage was caused by wind borne water and another saying it is flood coverage after the loss . To keep your understanding of what is necessary visit with your agent and discuss your personal situation . One other thing I should mention is that depending on where you live you may have a separate , hurricane deductible , wind and hail deductible , named storm deductible . These are often per cent deductibles and can mean a substantial out of pocket costs in the event of a windstorm . They are not exclusively used in hurricane prone areas . For example in Austin Texas you might have a $ 1000 deductible for most homeowners coverage -LRB- perils -RRB- , but 1 % wind and hail deductible even though Austin is over 200 miles to the Gulf .
First , I would consult an attorney in Texas to find out how Life Insurance is treated when there is a divorce . Generally speaking from my experience as a divorced father , Life Insurance is not an issue unless there is cash value which can be withdrawn . And if the Life Insurance was purchased during the marriage . If it was purchased prior , then it most likely would not be an issue . I know this is vague , which is why I recommend consulting an attorney in Texas .
The easiest way to compare home insurance quotes in Texas is to contact an independent insurance broker here in Texas and have them shop the market for you . An independent insurance broker works with several different companies ; this allows you to make only 1 call to the broker and they shop the market for you.This process helps to ensure that you get the best coverage at the best rate . We are an independent insurance broker and will be happy to prepare free , no obligation home insurance proposals for your review . Contact us at 469-206-8048 or you can e-mail me at WEBSITELINK .
In Texas , we have a website called OPIC -LRB- Office of Public Insurance Counsel -RRB- which is not affiliated with any insurance company . There you can see what coverages are offered and compare policies from multiple companies . If you are not in Texas , perhaps your state has a similar website .
To get life insurance online in Texas , go to a website offering free , instant quotes , and enter your information . If a quote comes up for you , then that policy is probably offered in Texas . From there you can contact the agency , or they will most likely contact you , to confirm that you are qualified for that rate . You will be able to apply for the policy via mailed , emailed , faxed or digitally signed application . Once approved , you will receive the policy by mail .
If you are age 65 and receiving Social Security benefits , you will automatically be enrolled in Medicare . Otherwise , you can go to medicare.gov to read how to apply for Medicare in Texas . You will be walked through the instructions step by step and be able to apply online , if you like . You can also go to a local Texas Social Security office to apply for Medicare .
Texas is just like any other state . The best Medicare supplemental insurance plan is the one that matches your needs and is affordable . Medigap insurance rates vary considerably by zip code , age , tobacco use and plan . Medicare Plan F is the most expensive plans in Texas , and the most popular . It is also the plan that pays the agent the highest commission . Sometimes you can find instant Medicare rates online but you really should talk to a broker if you want to find the best rates .
That is a great question ! Here in Texas , it is 30 days , but each State will have its own regulations as to the time period they will allow to pass before ticketing you for not being properly registered . I had to have a policy that was issued in Texas before being able to register my car and get plates , you may need to switch your policy first also . I 'd recommend going on line to your new State 's Department of Motor Vehicles or Secretary of State webpage and see what your State requires . Good luck with your move , and thank you for asking !
The average cost of life insurance in Texas depends on the person . Young people with excellent health pay far less than older persons with poor health . The type of policy also enters in , with permanent insurance having a higher price tag than term . To find the average price for a particular person in Texas , go to a website quote engine that provides quotes for your state . If you choose an instant quoter , you can input different face amounts and terms and see how they vary .
The answer to this is that it really depends on what replacement cost and geographically where your home is located . Here in the greater Atlanta area a $ 1000 deductible is quite common . What we see in the Tucson area -LRB- an area where there are not frequent wind storms -RRB- there is more likelihood of the deductible being $ 500 . And in Texas and some other states percentage deductibles have been the norm for decades . So in Texas it is not uncommon to see a 1 % wind and hail deductible an 1/2 % all other perils deductible . Lastly , there are some elements of this that is dependent of the size and replacement value of homes . If you are insuring a 700,000 home or greater , then a $ 2,500 deductible is quite common .
You can get health insurance online in Texas ! The easiest and most efficient way to obtain the best rates and best coverage is through an experienced broker . That 's our job and why we have top-rated websites . The . gov website is still not free from glitches , delays and security concerns . And most experienced health insurance brokers can offer `` off-Exchange '' plans which you can not get through the government website . A broker will help determine the amount of your federal subsidy , so you can view how much your Texas health insurance rate will reduce and which options are the best . If you missed Open Enrollment , a broker can review short-term plan options and other viable choices .
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
USAA does indeed sell life insurance . USAA -LRB- United Services Automobile Association -RRB- is a Texas based insurance carrier founded in 1922 to serve the financial needs of past and present members of our armed forces . USAA life insurance plans can be very competitive in some situations . You should always compare rates to other carriers when shopping for life insurance . You should also factor in underwriting , which can significantly impact the final rate .
To buy Disability Insurance in the state of Texas , you could contact a local agency that sells multiple Life Insurance products . If they sell several types of insurance , there is a chance they sell Disability Insurance , too . Or you could look on the internet by searching on Disability Insurance . Brokers are a good place to go for a good selection and competitive pricing .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Long Term Care Insurance The Same As Life Insurance ?
Long Term Care Insurance pays for bills incurred by the extended need for health care and/or assistance when people become unable to take care of themselves due to chronic illness or advanced age . Long Term Care benefit payments are made to them while they are still alive , so that they can pay their medical/housing bills . Or the payments go directly to the providers of such care -LRB- usually , a nursing home -RRB- . When the insured person passes , the need for the coverage and the policy payments end . Life Insurance pays the death benefit when the insured person passes away The face amount of the Life Insurance policy is paid to the beneficiary rather than the Insured person . However , some life insurance policies do have riders or living benefits that allow part of the face amount to be used while the Insured is alive but terminally ill , unable to care for themselves , or a few other reasons . These hybrid policies can cover both purposes .
No , Long Term Care insurance is not Life insurance . And Life insurance is not Long Term Care insurance . Both are insurances but neither one is car insurance either . Each are insuring different events . Long Term Care insurance provides for money to help pay for care provisions in the event that the insured requires medical and or personal care for an extended period of time due to illness or injury resulting in their inability to perform certain tasks for themselves . Most life insurance companies now make available a provision or `` rider '' to Life Insurance Policies that will pay up to a large percentage of the death benefit for long term care . And generally speaking a LTC rider is a lot less costly that a stand-alone LTC policy .
No , they serve two different functions . That being said , some life insurance policies have available a long term care rider that will pay the premium or allow access to a percentage of the death benefit if a person is unable to perform certain activities of daily living and need some type care . These plans are relatively new and are becoming increasingly popular . While most are not quite as good as a true long term care policy , they do present a good option if traditional Long Term Care Insurance is not affordable .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
Actually , long term disability insurance and long term care insurance are not the same type of policy nor do they cover the same things . Disability insurance is to replace a percentage of your income when you have an illness or injury so severe you can no longer work . Long term care insurance is primarily for your aging years to cover home health , assisted living and nursing homes when you are no longer able to take care of yourself . Long term disability insurance should be purchased at a young age as soon as you go to work earning a wage . Long term care insurance should be purchased between your late 50s or early 60s .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Company Has The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ?
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
I 'll share a common answer to a common question . It depends . Which company offers the cheapest auto insurance in Washington depends primarily on the insuredthe client . With all the variables companies use to get the final price , there is no way to tell what companies offers the cheapest rates for all clients all the time . In fact , most insurance companies do n't want to be the cheapest for every client . Most companies want to `` win '' accounts based on price 30-40 % of the time . With that information , it 's important to allow a trusted , licensed agent to shop multiple companies for you .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
The cheapest homeowners policy is one with appropriate limits that pays the maximum amount possible when you have a claim . At that point , premium means nothing ! The cheapest homeowners policy is sold by an insurance agent . That agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
The cheapest renter 's policy is the one that pays the full amount of a claim and leaves you paying nothing more than the deductible . Everything else costs too much ! You probably wanted to know what company or type of company is cheapest but that is not really a bargain . Having enough coverage with a company that will pay the claim is the cheapest way you can go .
The cheapest homeowners policy is one that gives the maximum reimbursement when you have a claim . Regardless of the monthly cost , having inadequate homeowners coverage can be devastating when there is a claim . That is the reason you have the policy . Since lenders and insurers generally fix the amount of coverage as the amount required to replace the building , there is not a lot that can be done to affect that part of the premium . However , there is also a liability section that receives scant attention . The cheapest thing to do is to select the highest limit you can possibly afford . A lawsuit could force you into bankruptcy . Be protected .
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
The cheapest long term care insurance company in Colorado varies according to the person who is applying . Some companies are better at older ages ; some are better for couples . Some are better for -LRB- or are the only ones that will take -RRB- certain health conditions . Some offers certain features at a lower price than others . To find the cheapest long term care insurance for you , contact an agency that sells a variety of long term care companies in Colorado and review your health and all the features offered with a knowledgeable agent . Together , you can work out which has the lowest price for what you qualify for and what you need .
The objective of purchasing a homeowners policy should be to protect you against an unsustainable loss . The most expensive homeowners policy is the one that is inadequate when a loss occurs . The cheapest homeowners policy is the one that pays what you expect it to pay . Many think that by shopping they will save money , where the real issue is level of protection and that is very difficult to shop for . Get an agent and trust the agent to do what is right for you .
The cost of Critical Care Insurance varies according to the age of the applicant , whether or not they use tobacco , their BMI , if they have a family history of certain illnesses , and whether they themselves have any health conditions . Therefore , what is the cheapest Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan for one person , may not be the cheapest for another . To find the cheapest quote for you , go to a website that offers Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan and call or visit them .
The cheapest homeowners policy is the one that pays the maximum amount possible when you have a claim . Of course it must be a policy on your house and it must be in force . What was paid for the policy is insignificant in many cases . The cheapest policy is sold by your trusted insurance agent , someone who listens to you , gives you sound financial advice and communicates clearly with you and the insurance company . That agent will do their best to make sure you are protected .
`` Cheaper '' in premium or `` cheaper '' in service provided and claims paid ? No one insurance company will always be the `` cheapest '' in premium . If you are looking for the cheapest premium , you best plan on shopping and switching monthly because competitive pricing/positioning is ALWAYS changing . However if you value appropriate coverage for your station in life , do your research on reputable companies , find an insurance professional you trust and stick with him or her . It will average out in the long term . You potentially do yourself a financial disservice at claim time if you elect to go with the cheapest .
You can find the cheapest auto insurance at your agents office . The cheapest auto insurance is the policy with adequate limits that pays damages that result from an accident . Since this can involve personal injury and property damage , the amount can increase rapidly . Your agent will listen to you , offer sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . When you have a claim , you will be happy that you have the cheapest insurancethe one that pays !
The best Homeowners Insurance in California is the policy that assures protection against your home and valuables to the level that you require . ` The best ' in many cases seems to mean the ` cheapest ' ; however , for professionals , ` The best ' means the most comprehensive coverage . HDA Insurance offers a large array of insurance products fit for every type of client from ` the cheapest ' to ` the most comprehensive ' . You may visit them online at : WEBSITELINK or you may call them toll-free on : 877-931-3368 Please taketime to review the coverage as it is the purpose of why you seek insurance .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does My Employer Have To Offer Health Insurance In Nevada ?
Currently in Nevada it is not required for an employer to offer health insurance to its employees . If you are looking at getting health insurance because your employer does not offer it at this time you can visit this site WEBSITELINK to get quotes for health insurance companies here in Nevada .
The State of Nevada 's Department of Business and Industry regulates life insurance in Nevada through the Nevada Division of Insurance . The Nevada Division of Insurance regulates both life insurance insurance agents and life insurance companies that do business in their state . They are based in the state 's capitol , Carson City , NV .
Currently in Nevada it is not required for an employer to offer health insurance to its employees . If you are looking at getting health insurance because your employer does not offer it at this time you can visit this site WEBSITELINK to get quotes for health insurance companies here in Nevada .
The Nevada department of insurance -LRB- also known as the Nevada Insurance Commissioner 's Office -RRB- regulates insurance in the state of Nevada . In every state the department of insurance or insurance commissioners office regulates insurance in that state .
If you find that the price for life insurance is high in Nevada , it may be because you are older , have a health condition , or are locking in the premium for a long period of time -LRB- such as happens with longer terms or permanent insurance -RRB- . It could also be that you are just hearing one quote and could benefit by shopping more companies . You can do that by visiting a website that offers instant quotes for life insurance in Nevada . There you will find the most competitive rates from a number of companies , for someone your age and health .
Yes auto insurance is mandatory in Nevada . The state of Nevada requires that your minimum liability limits be at least $ 15,000 in personal liability with a $ 30,000 cap and at least $ 10,000 in personal property coverage . Based on these minimums , you 'd be well advised to consider purchasing coverage that is higher than these amounts .
It is not required to havehomeowners insurance in Nevada . It is requiredby mortgage companieswhen you have a loan for the home . There are many reason to have home insurance even if it is not required . Some benefits of having this coverage is that it provides you liability coverage , personal property replacementand addtional living expense . If you have any more questions about home insurance you can give me a call at 702-609-9290 or visit my website to get a quote . WEBSITELINK
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance but has recently suspended Long Term Care sales in California , Arizona , Connecticut , Hawaii , Indiana , Nevada and New York . There has not been a formal announcement as to whether they plan to reintroduce products in those states in the future .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
Sewer Backup Coverage is an essential coverage on Homeowners Insurance policies . On standard Homeowners Insurance policies , the coverage usually can be purchased as an optional endorsement ; in many cases , the carriers will offer $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 per incident for a premium of $ 20 - $ 75 per year . On High Value Homeowners policies , the coverage may be included in the policy form and in some cases offer coverage at the same limit as other perils covered under Coverage A - Dwelling . Sewer/Drain backup coverage will provide coverage should your drains become blocked and the water backs up causing water damage to your home . It is always important for a homeowner to check the drains annually and make sure that the water runs quickly through the drainage system without any obstacles ; there are liquids available for purchase at hardware stores that advertisethe clearing of drains but it may be more prudent to contact a plumbing professional for the best advice ! You may contact your insurance carrier to add this valuable coverage to your current policy or you may obtain a quote with the coverage included . For quotes in Arizona , California & Nevada , you may follow the link : WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance is usually associated with the owner of the dwelling ; whereas Renters Insurance is specifically intended for the non-owner occupant of the dwelling . Renters Insurance is intended to provide Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Coverage for the tenant of a home . In a tenant occupied situation , the owner of the dwelling will usually carry Landlords Protection Coverage for the dwelling which does not offer any protection to the tenant . The tenant should purchase his/her own Renters Insurance . This is coverage is very inexpensive and is well worth it ; there have been many instances where a property owner has brought legal action against a tenant for negligence leading to a fire or other type of claim ; the Renters Insurance provides Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant which may provide defense in such an occurrence . For a renters quote in California , Arizona or Nevada , you may click on : WEBSITELINK For all other States , you should find a licensed representative in your State for a quote .
Due to fact that critical illness is priced based on health and age of the proposed insured and because insurers all seek different degrees of risk , it is not possible to categorically declare on insurer or one plan as being the cheapest within a geographic area like a specific state . You should seek out the assistance of an agent who is licensed in the state of Nevada to compare the prices of numerous critical illness insurance policies .
Geico ` Government Employees Insurance Company ' underwrites Auto Insurance in all States . When it comes to Property Coverage , Geico has a wholly owned subsidiary that is an insurance agency and they act as an agent to provide quotes with selected insurance carriers who underwrite property risk . Renters Insurance is a very valuable form of protection that usually comes at an inexpensive premium . For those that are concerned about a legal action brought against them for negligence which is very common in the situation of tenants , it is imperative that you purchase the maximum allowed amount of liability insurance ; usually $ 500,000 . Depending on the State . An approximate 80 % of the premium will depend on your declared amount of Personal Contents and required deductible -LRB- we recommend no less than $ 1,000 -RRB- . The deductible does not apply to Personal Liability in most States thus allowing you 100 % defense and coverage -LRB- please refer to your policy for specific details -RRB- . For a Renters Insurance quote in California , Arizona or Nevada . You may use the following link : WEBSITELINK We will be happy to answer any further questions ! Happy Researching !
Renters Insurance is intended to provide protection for Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- and personal liability protection to those that reside in but do not own the home . The liability section of this policy form carries perhaps 15 % of the overall cost but in our opinion , it carries 85 % of the necessary protection . Especially for those renting in a multi unit building , it is common for negligence claims to arise due to water damage , smoke damage or fire damage to adjacent units or to the building itself . The liability section generally does not have a deductible and gives you first dollar defense up to the policy limits . A tenant could be sued for negligently over filling a bathtub thereby flooding the unit below causing building and contents damage ; there have been cases oftenants falling asleep while smoking thereby causing a fire . The personal property section will cover the tenant 's personal contents against Fire , Smoke Damage , Theft , Water Damage and some other covered perils . It is important to note that there are limitations on the value of Jewelry , Furs , Silverware and other valuables ; for those that have high valued items , a Personal Article Floater would be needed to provide protection . Also , it is important to understand that the peril of Earthquake is not included on a standard policy but may or may not be available by endorsement depending on the insurance company and State . For a free quote in California , Arizona or Nevada , please click the following link : WEBSITELINK
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
Since Medicare covers people over the age of 65 , and those with certain disabilities that have received Social Security benefits for 25 months , it would be very rare for Medicare to cover a circumcision . It would be possible , if someone with Medicare had a true medical need to be circumcisized later in the life , but very rare , as most circumcisions are done at birth . Given the fact that 40 % of births in American are covered by Medicaid , a better question may be `` Does Medicaid cover circumcisions ? '' That varies by state , as 18 states currently do not cover this procedure , primarily due to the fact that it is most often elective , or not necessary . the 18 states that do n't cover circumcisions , along with the year they stopped : Colorado 2011 South Carolina 2011 Louisiana 2005 Idaho 2005 Minnesota 2005 Maine 2004 Montana 2003 Utah 2003 Florida 2003 Missouri 2002 Arizona 2002 North Carolina 2002 California before 1999 North Dakota before 1999 Oregon before 1999 Mississippi before 1999 Nevada before 1999 Washington before 1999
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
Yes , homeowners insurance is available online . There are a number of underwriting companies that provide an online questionnaire to reveal the eligibility of the risk . For online quotes and insurance in California , Arizona & Nevada , you may click on : WEBSITELINK For all other States , you may search for a licensed brokerage allowing you access online .
For residents of Arizona , California & Nevada , Onlie Renters Insurance is available at the following link : WEBSITELINK Renters Insurance is a valuable form of protection for not only your Personal Contents but also Personal Liability Insurance which will protect you from a legal action brought against you for negligence ; these claims may occur as a result of a Fire , Smoke Damage or Water Damage claim where the insured is accused of negligence causing the claim and therefore possible damage to the building and/or other units .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does AAA Provide Renters Insurance ?
AAA does indeed offer house , apartment and condo insurance . They also include a 10 % discount on premiums if you are a AA member . Typically , renters insurance policies are the cheapest form of property coverage since the actual dwelling where you live , is not covered by you . However , you would have liability coverage included in your policy along with other benefits , including reimbursement if you had to temporarily move elsewhere because of a specific covered claim .
You can get renter 's insurance through the AAA insurance agency , but your AAA membership does not automatically include renter 's insurance . You can contact AAA or another independent insurance agent and they can compare quotes among several different carriers . It is often cheaper to purchase both renters and auto insurance through the same company as they will provide discounts for multiple policies .
AM Best S&P Moody 's Fitch Comdex 1 Teachers Ins & Ann Assoc A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 2 Northwestern Mutual Life Ins A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 3 Massachusetts Mutual Life Ins A + + AA + Aa2 AA + 98 4 New York Life Ins Co A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 5 New York Life Ins & Ann A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100
AAA Term life insurance has the same guarantees of most Term life insurance . As of June , 2012 , their company 's AM Best rating is A - . To compare rates with AAA Term life insurance , go to a website offering instant life insurance quotes . Also , be sure to review the health requirements needed for AAA life insurance before applying . If you apply and are declined , it will go on your MIB and could make it more difficult to purchase some other life insurance policies .
Every rating agency has their own ratings . With AM Best , A + + is their best rating . With Fitch , their highest rating is AAA . Moody 's highest rating is Aaa . S&P 's best life insurance company rating is AAA . Weiss 's highest rating is A + . The companies with the best ratings will have high ratings from all these agencies .
There is no one top rated life insurance company , but every life insurance company has the chance to earn the top ratings from several different rating companies . That being said , only a small % of companies get the top rating . To find a company 's rating , you can go to their website and hit the `` About Us '' tab . The main rating companies are AM Best -LRB- for which A + + is their top rating -RRB- , S&P -LRB- for which AAA is highest -RRB- , Fitch -LRB- also uses AAA for best rating -RRB- and Moody 's -LRB- Aaa is their top rating -RRB- .
Yes , AAA -LRB- American Automobile Association -RRB- does offer life insurance . In order to compare AAA 's life insurance prices to the quotes from other companies , visit a website that offers instant life insurance quotes . Be sure to compare `` apples to apples '' , such as guarantees and prices at the actual health rating that you will be rated with each company .
Yes , AAA does offer term life insurance directly to consumers . They have a rating of A - from A.M.Best , the life insurance rating company . However , unlike homeowners or auto coverage , no carrier can offer a discount for life insurance . You will find many carriers less expensive and with higher financial ratings than AAA . Find a good independent life insurance agent that can help with your coverage .
As of June , 2012 , the AM Best rating for AAA life insurance was A - . It 's Term insurance is competitive and has the same guarantees as most life insurance companies . It does require fairly good health to get the Term insurance , although they offer Whole Life that covers more health conditions . Rather than rely on the quotes of one carrier , you might find a better price shopping multiple carriers , as you can get via one agency or online website . That way , you will have someone that can guide you to another product if you do not qualify or do n't care for AAA has to offer .
AAA while being best known for its ' auto towing services and for those of us old enough to remember , their tripticket map service , does indeed sell term insurance . However their are many carriers with higher financial ratings that charge less . In fact , I once had a client who worked for AAA but decided on a less expensive policy with better ratings and a lower cost .
AAA has auto insurance in many states and their rates are typically very competitive . Although they are mostly known for towing and labor benefits along with travel guides , they do have an insurance wing that is very reputable . A licensed broker can provide quotes from AAA and many other highly-rated carriers .
Home insurance can be obtained numerous property and casualty insurance companies . If you currently have auto insurance , you may start with that company as having both auto and homeowners policies with the same company can provide discounts that reduce your overall cost . You can also get quotes online from companies such as State Farm , Farmer 's , Liberty Mutual , and Allstate . While these companies will provide quotes for their own companies , getting a quote from an insurance broker or AAA insurance can provide quotes from several different companies and may provide your best opportunity to find the lowest cost . Be sure to speak to an experienced insurance agent to ensure you have proper coverage . Just because once company has the lowest price does n't make it your best option . Be sure understand deductibles and riders such as earthquake insurance .
Great question ! Here in Texas the American Automobile Association -LRB- AAA -RRB- does offer renters , home owners and even watercraft insurance in addition to their Auto insurance policies . They also have life insurance and financial services . I 'm fairly certain that your local office will also . Drop them a line and ask them to be sure . Thanks for asking !
AAA does indeed offer house , apartment and condo insurance . They also include a 10 % discount on premiums if you are a AA member . Typically , renters insurance policies are the cheapest form of property coverage since the actual dwelling where you live , is not covered by you . However , you would have liability coverage included in your policy along with other benefits , including reimbursement if you had to temporarily move elsewhere because of a specific covered claim .
AAA Life Insurance Company has a rating of A - by AM Best as of May 31 , 2013 . They offer several types of life insurance products and premiums are guaranteed level , which is a good feature to have . It can be difficult to get AAA life insurance with some health conditions .
Jim has pointed out some excellent features of AAA life insurance that you should know before buying AAA 's coverage . I would like to add that it is also easy to be declined for their life insurance , and that being declined by them can keep you from getting other coverage for which you would otherwise qualify . I reiterate that it is up to you to read the fine print before mailing in your application . If you are unsure whether you qualify , or do not understand the conditions of this type of coverage , call one of us on this website and we will be happy to explain it to you . Thanks for asking .
I do n't know about homeowner policy availability through AAA in every State but I can speak personally for Florida . They are my homeowner carrier in Florida . Their rate was reasonably competitive and the coverages are good . The customer service was great . Therefore , since Florida is one of the least favorite States for top insurers to do business in , I would think that the chances are good they are available in most States . If you are an AAA Member , you have a chance to get a good carrier .
There are six rating services that monitor and assign financial strength or claims paying ability rankings : A.M Best , S&P , Moodys Fitch , Comdex and Weiss . A.M. Best measures claims paying ability , the rest financial stability or strength . The highest A.M. Best rating is AA + . The highest S&P rating is AAA , but when the U.S. government was downgraded by S&P , so were the AAA rated life insurance companies . There are public forums online on the web where you can obtain the ratings of most life insurance companies that manufacture annuities .
That is a great question ! I 'm assuming that you are talking about the offer for `` up to $ 200,000 of term life insurance at members only group rates '' ? Any offers like this that you receive , or see advertised on television are offered by reputable companies , and are valid policies . Are they good for you , is the better question . In AAA 's case , -LRB- and I just happen to have a copy of their ad here , I use it for teaching purposes -RRB- there are a couple of things to look at that this type of advertised policy does , that a typical life insurance policy would n't . First , the small print tells you that this policy ends when you turn 80 . If you live to be 80 and a day , you have no coverage . If you look at the nicely colored chart with the ages and prices , you will see that every 5 years they increase , often pretty dramatically . The small print again tells us that your monthly rate increases to be whatever your age bracket becomes . So at age 64 , you pay a price , at 65 , it increases to the new price until you turn 70 , when it increases again . It is good in that if you can get through the few health questions , you are `` approved '' , unless of course the authorization that you okay in the small print turns up something in your health history that either denies your coverage , or increases your rate . Please understand that in no way am I disrespecting AAA or anyone else who advertises this kind of policy , because all of these things are clearly stated , and the assumption is that you the consumer can understand them , and by purchasing them , are accepting the terms of the policy , as legally stated . I wholeheartedly advise that you find a local agent who can show you what you would pay over your lifetime for this policy , and give you a few other policies to compare it to . Please , whatever you do , do NOT fill out a bunch of different ones , hoping one will be approved ! The exact opposite happens a great amount of the time . If you would like more details , please contact me , I will make time for you to discuss this privately . Thank you for asking !
The cost to insure a Jeep Wrangler depends on many factors including where you live -LRB- county and/or zip code -RRB- , your age , the number of moving violations/accidents in the last three years , the age of the vehicle , and the coverage -LRB- collision , comprehensive , liability limits etc. . . -RRB- that you need . The monthly rate could be as little as $ 25 of much much more . Some carriers will give you a substantial discount if you have excellent or superior credit . Additional discounts are often available if you are a member of AAA or AARP , or package your homeowner 's or renter 's insurance with the car insurance company that covers your Jeep Wrangler . Fortunately , it only takes a few moments to obtain a free quote and compare the cheapest companies . Answer to this question was provided by www.carinsurancezoom.org , the premier auto insurance resource for consumers , and providing the lowest rates from top-rated companies . Ed Harris has been a top US Broker for more than 34 years and owns the website .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Get Public Health Insurance ?
Public health insurance -LRB- through government sources -RRB- is available if you qualify . Typically , it is based on income and perhaps other qualifications . Contacting your local Medicaid office is a great start to see if you meet their guidelines . If you do n't , they can refer you to a program that could assist you .
That is a great question ! With the over fifty attempted repeal tries , and the very public stances against it that the Republican party has , you are certainly right to wonder . But for all of the bluster and rhetoric , here 's what the reality is - the American public does like the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , as the uninsured rate is the lowest it 's been in decades . The Supreme Court decisions gives the Law solid legal footing . With an election looming , and still stinging from what most in the Republican party thought was going to be a slam-dunk win 4 years ago on a platform of repealing the Act , I think that the wiser leaders of the party know they need to rethink that strategy . As much as they dislike it , the voting electorate does like it , and sadly , many rely on the subsidies to be able to afford their coverage . The adding of Medicaid has progressed slowly but surely , even in the Red States that had spoken out against it , as leaders realize that after the nearly 2 decades of economic pressure , the average American needs the assistance . Even as there seems to be a to tendency to disregard facts in politics , when it comes down to where the votes are coming from , there can be softening or complete reversals of what had been very public stands on issues like health care.With the polling numbers falling solidly in favor of the Act , and the Law being upheld twice in the Supreme Court , I 'd suspect you will hear less talk of repealing the Act . That said , I 'm certain that each candidate will have an opinion on how he or she will change the Law to improve what does n't work as well as it could . There is intense pressure from the insurance companies to regain the incredible profits they were making , and other medical companies also would like to push their agenda 's , so the parts of the law that kept prices low I 'd expect to see attacked . So in short , repealed ? No . Changed ? Probably , depending upon the outcome of the election , and how the public responds to the proposed changes . A great question , and one we in the industry have been watching closely also . Thanks for asking !
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
An affidavit of spousal health insurance is a legal document that may be required by an employer or governmental health plan -LRB- such as a state 's Children 's Health Insurance Plan or CHIP -RRB- that documents if the employee or applicant 's spouse is employed and if they are eligible for or covered by their employer 's group health insurance plan . This form will be used to determine if the spouse is eligible for enrollment or determine that their employer 's plan will pay in a primary capacity -LRB- pays the claim first -RRB- and the other employer 's plan or the government based health plan will pay in a secondary capacity -LRB- paying on any unpaid balance after the primary insurance carrier has paid on a claim -RRB- . Expect to see these types of forms in your workplace or if you or a family member are accessing public health insurance programs . Increasing numbers of employers , both private sector and public sector , are making efforts to move dependent spouses who have access to health insurance elsewhere off of their plans and onto the spouse 's employer 's plan . Increasingly an additional premium penalty is being applied to employees who insist on covering a spouse who has coverage available through another employer or source . And , in the more extreme circumstances some employers are declining to cover spouses at all . These actions are a result of the increasing costs of health care that employers and governmental agencies are experiencing and to a quirk in the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- that does not define a spouse as a dependent . Unfortunately , this is what happens when politician 's pass a law without reading it as was the case with the 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act .
New York Life is not a publically traded company . New York Life is a mutual company . This means their policyholders are owners of the company versus publically traded on the stock exchange . Some types ofNew York Life whole life policies even allow voting rights and dividends for the policyholders . There are both plus and minus to mutual companies versus publically traded companies .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Health Insurance is a Privilege ; it is a privilege to have #healthinsurance which is a benefit in many ways . If an insurance company insures a person in return for a premium paid , the insured person now has the benefit of lower health costs due to agreed upon health tariffs negotiated between the insurance carriers and health providers , in addition , the insured person will only be responsible for a portion of the now lower fees for health services received . In areas of socialized health care , the Government or Employers may be paying the premiums for the same benefits explained above . The outcome is always better when everyone is insured since it lowers the overall ` risk ' taken by the insurance companies ; with better health care , comes better health , lower risk , lower premium and a greater public awareness of the ability to promote better health care options . For more information regarding Health Insurance , you may visit : WEBSITELINK
That is a great question ! I guess the best way to answer it is you say pota-toe , they say pota-tah . Technically , Medicare is public , because it is administered by the Federal Government . But ... they use private insurers to run it . The best way to describe it is that it 's like the way your employer runs their insurance program - it 's public , because it 's offered to all employees and they pay for some of it , but the plans are offered through a private insurance company . The confusion for the public vs. private debate was an attempt by debating politicians to generate confusion , and make things difficult . Since that seems to be what we pay them to do , they were just really doing a good job ! I hope that this helps a little at simplifying the answer for you . If you would like to try to clear this up a little more , please feel free to contact me , I love a challenge ! -LRB- And who better to challenge us than a bunch of politicians ? -RRB- Thanks for asking !
In my personal experience , all the companies I have worked with want to provide a service for their clients and do it honestly . They try hard to be fair and sometimes I have seen them bend in favor of the client . I think what people hear are the few times someone has been `` wronged '' by the company . From my own personal experience in such a case , I can say that companies can not air their side of the story . With one company I used to work with , the company offered a fair offer to settle in a small kitchen fire . The client refused and wanted the entire house rebuilt . The client went public about how the company would was not making a good offer . Over a year later , the community realized how unreasonable the client was being and his support dwindled quickly . The company had no recourse . The agents had no recourse . They could not talk about the details due to privacy issues . Meanwhile , the client is making every effort he can to publically trash the company . There are some situations where the company has to go by what the contract states and there may be some situation where it may not feel `` right '' to the client , but the company has to honor the contract . With all that said , I would recommend working with a broker to help you find an insurance company and also help fight for you in those situations where you feel like you have been wronged . Having a broker who is familiar with the people in the company will help your case more than you can imagine .
The so-called public health insurance option was an idea floated around when Obamacare laws were being crafted . The idea was the federal government would provide a plan , similar to Medicare , for individuals to consider in addition to private health insurance plans . The public option never got off the ground as it was deemed too expensive .
Unfortunately , as a 30 year veteran of the health insurance industry I have to tell you there is no objective measure or rating that the consumer can refer to in attempting to answer the question `` Which Are The Best Health Insurance Providers ? '' . The herd has been thinned out considerably amongst health insurance carriers over the last 20 years and so you have your big national players life AETNA , Assurant , CIGNA , Humana , United Healthcare , WellPoint , state based Blue Cross/BlueShield plans and then more regionally based carriers like Kaiser . To be blunt , insurance carriers have become more of a commodity -LRB- some might argue public utility -RRB- these days than they would ever want to admit to . They are all copying each other and often using the same health care providers in their networks . So , while it would be incorrect to say they are all identical , the quality of care and customer service levels from the consumer 's perspective are very similar from one health insurance carrier to the next . From the health care provider 's perspective some health insurance carriers have reputations for being more aggressive in negotiating discounts and being easy or complicated to get paid by than other health insurance company 's do . But , even this can vary from state to state and change over time as health insurance carriers continually adjust to the changing environment .
No . Paid family leave is an employee benefit and one not offered by all employers . It may be taken in conjunction with a disabling event but it is in no way disability insurance . The Federal Family Medical Leave Act -LRB- FMLA -RRB- provides certain employees with up to 12-weeks of UNPAID , job protected leave per year and it does require that group health benefits be maintained during such a leave . The FMLA applies only in specific life circumstances and is applicable to all public agencies , public & private elementary and secondary schools and companies with 50 or more employees .
No . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka ObamaCare -RRB- is on health insurance only . It wo n't affect life insurance , auto insurance , home owners insurance or anything other than health insurance . Long term if it causes a lot of frustrated people to jump off bridges or tall buildings it could eventually have an impact on life insurance rates . But so far that frustration has been mainly found in business owners and health insurance agents and has not affected the general public . We will have to see how things go in 2014 to see if it is truly an AFFORDABLE Care Act .
Car insurance is valid on private and public land . Although a citation may not be issued , the coverage -LRB- liability , collision , comprehensive -RRB- etc. . . would apply . If driving on public land and you have an accident -LRB- especially if you are hit by another driver -RRB- , you can still call the policy at that time .
Private Disability Insurance benefits do not affect Social Security Disability Income -LRB- SSDI -RRB- benefits . However , some public disability benefits may reduce the amount of SSDI that you receive , if the total of both public funds totals over 80 % of the disabled person 's income .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
You may certainly keep a car that is un insured , but you probably wo n't be able to regester and drive it on public roads . In CT as in most states , car insurance is a requirement for registration and use of any car on public roads and highways . Some farms maintain vehicles that are used strictly on their land and never leave the property . In cases such as this the state regulations generally do not apply . General rule of thumb : if it needs to be registered to use , then it needs to be insured .
The answer to this question depends on the laws of the state you are from . If you plan non operating -LRB- PNO -RRB- and renew car registration with PNO fee you do n't have to have insurance on it . The only requirement that insurance company may have is that your car is properly registered with DMV . For instance , if the car is salvaged and there is no title , you ca n't insure it . But if the title was issued - you can get coverage . Here is a tricky question : if you own an off road mobile equipment , for instance , the one used in construction , and this vehicle is not designed / nor used on public roads - you are not required to register -LRB- i.e. forklift -RRB- . But if you cross a highway on a public road , than this creates a legal issue . This is a known fact . In the end , to answer your question more info is required . Do n't relay on anything you read here .
An auto policy is a package of coverages . The customer can select all or some of the coverages available . The most important coverage is public liability and property damage . Your state probably requires this coverage on every car using the public roads , but since not everyone obeys the law there is another section of coverages for uninsured and underinsured drives coverage in case you are in a collision with someone without insurance or with inadequate insurance . Another major section is physical damage . Your lender usually requires that you carry this coverage . It restores your car after you pay the deductible for a wide range of events . There are additional coverages and services that are frequently included in the policy but these are the main coverages .
What kind of retirement plan is a PSERS ? While not familiar with the letters as they may be different in my state , I will assume you are asking about PERS ? PERS is short for the Public Employees Retirement System . It is the pension plan in my state for our public school teachers and has several versions . The first PERS1 was created in 1947 and closed in 1977 . The second PERSII was created in 1977 and closed around 2000 . PERS III is currently in effect and may close in the next few years as legislature moves to reduce their liability to employees for retirement . When these plans close , they do not end , they just stop taking new participants . The state does not lose their obligation to employees and retirees in these plans .
end question
start question
annuities
Where Are Premiums From Fixed Annuities Invested ?
Life and annuity companies generally purchase investment grade government bonds as their dominant portfolio position . Similar to a bank , an insurance company attempts to generate a return from their portfolio , keep a portion of that return for their profit margin and pass on the rest to it 's policy holder .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
Fixed annuities invest your premium into conservative , long term securities -LRB- usually bonds -RRB- chosen by the company . These steady investments allow the company to guarantee you fixed payments later on . Your payments are also guaranteed to last a number of years or a lifetime , determined in advance . Variable annuities are invested in stocks and more risky investments which the annuity holders choose themselves . They may have some guaranteed elements , but also have the potential to pay more than a fixed annuity , or less than a fixed annuity , due to that element of risk .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
I 'm going to keep this simple and generic as we can spend a lot of time reviewing this question . First , what is an annuity ? An annuity is simply a contract between you and an insurance company where they offer market like gains or guaranteed gains like in a CD over a length of time , usually anywhere from 3 to 15 years . A fixed annuity simply means the money is not invested in the market although growth may be tied to gains but you will not get 100 % of gain but you also will not see the losses either due to the downside guarantees . A variable annuity invests money in the market with all the risks associated to market investing . There usually are death benefit guarantees where if you die before taking money out , the initial amount of premium is returned to your heirs . Please contact a registered representative to get more details and a prospectus .
That is a great question ! While a fixed annuity has a lot of great things going for it , there are a couple of things that you do need to look out for . The first is your liquidity . With any deferred annuity there is a period of time where the money you 've set aside to fund it can not be touched without incurring hefty fees , or damaging your earnings potential . If you suspect that you might need to access that cash at any point , then maybe an annuity might not be the right vehicle for you . The second involves the rate of return that you are promised off the annuity . Will the rate be enough after fees to outpace inflation and provide a return that is comparable to another investment vehicle ? If not , then again this might not be the best investment vehicle . As far as safe investments go , fixed annuities are among the best , but please be sure to really think it over , and work with a trusted adviser before purchasing one . Please make sure that it ia a suitable vehicle for you . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
No , a fixed annuity is not a security and is not governed by the SEC . A fixed annuity guarantees that you will receive a fixed payment for a fixed period of time ... either a number of years or for the rest or your life . As such , no part of the annuity is invested in the stock market or other securities where there is the risk of loss .
An annuity is the only financial instrument that will pay a guaranteed income for the rest of your life . A fixed annuity has an established guaranteed rate of interest . There isnt any risk of losing money in a fixed annuity . Fixed annuities actually pay a current rate of interest which is normally higher than the guaranteed rate . There is a tendency for that rate to mirror market conditions and remain competitive . There are many annuities that have been written where the guaranteed rate exceeds the current rate making them exceptionally good investments .
Hybrid annuities are fixed indexed annuities , equity indexed annuities , or variable annuities with a rider that offers lifetime income . Some also offer enhanced death benefit , long term care , and/or home health care . Hybrid annuities work by allowing the buyer to invest funds in a fixed account as well as variable account . The fixed account provides the guaranteed funds and the variable components provide for greater return by investing in non-guaranteed securities .
There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Deferred annuities are used as money accumulation vehicles , since they are issued by insurance companies they have features and guarantees other investments can not match . These are of particular interest to self - employed -LRB- any age -RRB- , OR those within 10 to 15 years of retirement or already retired . Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIAs -RRB- are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- more information is available at www.GuaranteedInterest.ca In Canada , variable annuities are called segregated funds or seg funds they are similar to mutual funds . More information available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca Immediate annuities provide a guaranteed income stream in exchange for a lump sum premium . They are used as part of a retirement income strategy to provide stability.They are often used to build a guaranteed income to cover fixed expenses . If have assets that are generating interest income and you do not need access to all the capital during your lifetime , the `` insured annuity strategy '' is worth exploring . The objective is to increase your current after tax income while preserving your asset for your heirs . Not for everyone , but the results can be quite dramatic , so it is worth a look . Annuities can also be used to assist in a number of personal and corporate planning strategies , too numerous and complex to be cover here . In Canada , if you are over 65 , income from Interest from a prescribed non-registered annuity qualifies for the $ 2,000 pension tax credit . Note : Interest from a Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also qualifies . GIAs are like Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- but the are issued by insurance companies . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Fixed Annuities are very safe . Variable Annuities however are subject to stock market fluctuations . Fixed Annuities offer Guarantees . For every contractual Guarantee that an Insurance Company makes -LRB- such as 3 % Guaranteed for 5 years -RRB- , must be backed by purchasing a mix of US Treasuries along with a small amount of various other investments . But mostly the Guarantees made by the Insurance Company are largely backed by the financial stability of US Treasuries -LRB- which are considered the safest investment class there is -RRB- . As pointed out already , the best way to judge the financial stability of an insurance company is by their Financial Ratings . In the investment world , And ratings that is a B + + or higher is considered `` investment grade '' . Although as the term of the contract increases , your minimum acceptable Financial Rating should increase as well in my opinion . A longer time frame creates more risk . So for a 3 or 4 year Annuity a B + + Rating might be acceptable for some people . But for an Annuity that is 6 years or longer , it is highly recommended to use an `` A '' Rated Carrier .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Where Can You Rollover A 401K ?
A 401k can be rolled over at most any bank , insurance , investment , financial firm in the country . The type of investment or annuity vehicle is actually the choice you must understand.That vehicle will get you different types of return on your money . Its very important to research where the 401k is rolled over which notifies the IRS or the rollover so it is not taxable .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- can be rolled into several investment vehicles . The character of the money must remain the same so it is essential that you differentiate any money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- that came from after tax dollars . It is usually best to take those out directly and either spend them -LRB- they are tax free -RRB- or invest in a Roth IRA . The balance can be rolled into any Individual Retirement Account .
Can you rollover your 401k to a roth ira ? Not really no , there is no provision that allows you to roll the values in your 401k into a Roth without tax penalties . If you did something like this you would need to cash out your 401k which would be taxed at an income tax level combined with your current income , along with a 10 % penalty . So you would be losing roughly 40 % or more of you 401k values . Not something easily made up no matter how good an investment picker you might be .
That is a great question ! Simply put , a 401k rollover is what you call the action of taking the funds from one 401k and moving them -LRB- or `` rolling them over '' -RRB- into another 401k fund , or similar retirement vehicle . This has to be done in a very timely fashion , or there are tax consequences , and is most commonly done when you switch employers , and want to keep funding the 401k . Thanks for asking !
A 401k can be rolled over at most any bank , insurance , investment , financial firm in the country . The type of investment or annuity vehicle is actually the choice you must understand.That vehicle will get you different types of return on your money . Its very important to research where the 401k is rolled over which notifies the IRS or the rollover so it is not taxable .
As long as your company allows roll overs into their retirement plan , you can roll your 403b money into that 401k plan . One exception may be if you have previously comingled your 403b funds with another IRA . Your company 401k plan administrator should be able to answer your specific questions . You can also roll your 403b into a traditional IRA or Roth IRA . Here is a link to an IRS rollover chart which shows all the directions retirement money can move . WEBSITELINK
That is a great question . I 'm a little confused though - are you asking for investment advice , or asking what to do with a 401k that is floating around ? If it 's investment advice , that is impossible to give without understanding your risk tolerance , time frame for investing , and your liquidity needs . You would have to contact me privately for more details before I could even begin to think of giving you direction . If it is what to do with a 401k that you 'd like to rollover , you need to do that fairly quickly , or you are going to have one heck of a tax bill . Please seek a financial adviser for help , okay ? Thanks for asking !
This is a tough question . How old are you ? What is your health ? And why are you taking the money out ? If you are older than 591/2 , you can request a distribution form from your plan sponsor or employer . The form will ask whether you want to take a single distribution or a series of systematic payments . If it is not going into a Rollover IRA , the sponsor usually withholds the taxes on your behalf and you would get the net amount paid to you either in a check or an EFT . If you are YOUNGER than 591/2 , there is a 10 % excise tax that is charged -LRB- premature withdrawal -RRB- by the IRS . So if you can , try and avoid withdrawing funds prior to your retirement and do a LOAN instead . That way you are paying yourself the interest on the loaned portion of the 401K funds , and not a bank . Depending on your plan , you may also be able to take out what they call `` in service '' distributions . These allow you to transfer your funds into IRA accounts and diversify your investments for retirement . And thanks to a recent IRS change , you can even move funds from your Retirement and create a guaranteed income stream -LRB- provided by the carrier that you purchase the product from -RRB- through a Deferred Income Annuity . Think of this like buying a defined benefit with your retirement assets that you can never outlive . I hope that this answers your question .
Is a rollover IRA a Roth IRA ? Well , no . Really two different things going on here . You ca n't rollover an IRA into a Roth plan without paying taxes on the transaction . In other words you have to cash your IRA out , pay taxes and then you could possibly put them in a Roth . A rollover IRA usually means moving funds from one to another similar plans . Usually , there are no tax consequences for a rollover .
No . Unfortunately , conversion is a one-way street . You can convert term insurance to permanent insurance but can not convert permanent insurance to term insurance . If you 're looking to get out of a whole life policy but still secure coverage at a lower price , you can look at completing a 1035 rollover into a Guaranteed Universal Life policy . It 's another permanent insurance program that minimizes the buildup of cash value to keep the premium at the lowest possible level with premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life . The 1035 rollover portion takes the cash value inside the whole life policy and applies it to the first year premium for the Guaranteed Universal Life policy to lower the premium even further . This can be a very valuable alternative course of action that is definitely worth considering . If you have a participating whole life policy , then the dividends paid by the program can be used to purchase paid-up additions to the policy -LRB- little amounts of paid-up coverage that accumulate over time that do not require additional premiums for the policy -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful . Please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions -LRB- you can reach me via the `` contact me '' button next to my name -RRB- . There are no fees for my services - all quotes are provided at no cost to you . Thanks very much .
An annuity rollover from one annuity to another is generally a tax free 1035 exchange . The rollover needs to be in the same non-qualified or qualified category . This permits the transfer one annuity to another annuity without incurring a taxable event on the gain in the policy . A 1035 exchange also includes the notification of the policy surrender from the replacing company to the existing company .
There is one circumstance that I am aware of that will allow you to roll a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- balance to a Roth IRA without the associated taxes and penalties . If your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan has a Roth option , which is becoming more common , then you can roll the Roth portion of the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to a Roth IRA . I actually just did this for a client who had a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- balance that had two balances , one Roth and one traditional . We created two Rollover IRA accounts , one Roth and one traditional and completed the rollover .
A rollover IRA is an IRA that is funded from the proceeds of another qualified plan , most likely another IRA or a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The proceeds of these plans all have the same tax consequence so a rollover is simple . A Roth IRA has different tax rules . In order to roll an IRA or 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into a Roth IRA , the proceeds must be subject to income tax as ordinary income . This may be a very wise thing to do but should not be done without some competent counsel .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
Per IRS rules , you CAN NOT rollover a Variable Annuity to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . You can move a Variable Annuity into an Individual Retirement Account -LRB- IRA -RRB- however , turning non-qualified monies into qualified , meaning you have to follow the rules for IRA 's . I recommend that you reach out to your Representative who helped you set up your Annuity to talk about options you have available . Annuities have surrender charges which need to be taken into consideration . If you need a Representative , let me know .
I am not a CPA . The character of the program hasnt changed . I am pretty sure that the money can be rolled into a Roth IRA without difficulty . You should understand that rollovers are coming under increasing scrutiny . Make sure that you fully understand the implications of the roll-over .
Assuming that by rollover you mean exchange your existing cash value life insurance policy for a new one , heres the answer . Under the 1035 exchange rules you can transfer from one life insurance company to another without taxation on the gain or use the proceeds to carry forward basis . A limited inventory of life insurance companies accept 1035 exchanges with policy loans .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
Tax deferred annuities generally have maturity or contract dates . Some annuity contracts rollover to a new period . It 's important to be aware of these dates , so you can decide whether to remain in the existing annuity or look for another alternative , one of which may be a 1035 exchange into a new annuity contract .
The reason many people rollover their 401 k plans is generally to have better control over the account if you are leaving that company . Also you have better control rather than having to contact the old imployer . You may get a getter return on your 40l k with a different investment firm ,
end question
start question
health-insurance
Will Companies Drop Health Insurance Because Of Obamacare ?
No , statistically around 99 % large companies in the US -LRB- 200 + employees -RRB- offer health benefits , about 96 % of medium companies -LRB- 50-199 employees -RRB- offer health benefits , and about 92 % of small companies -LRB- < 49 employees -RRB- offer health benefits . There may be a significant impact on the small employer statistics as state and federal exchanges become available . However I can confidently say that any such statistical shift in the small employer health benefits market will most likely be a short term -LRB- perhaps 3-5 year -RRB- variation that will in time reflect a very small impact in the % of small businesses offering health benefits . The complex structuring options and technical details will render the small business exchanges as effective at delivering optimal results as online tax software is in helping someone who is not well versed in accounting manage pay-roll and state/federal tax obligations/deductions . Also the businesses who do not provide meaningful benefit programs to their employees will find it hard to compete with the other companies who are able to leverage such programs to provide them with a distinct competitive advantage . That being said the exchanges will revolutionize the marketplace of individual health insurance policies .
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
Yes , but not just because someone in the front office feels like picking on you that day . There would have to be some change in your eligibility status or what the company 's policy is to trigger such an event . For example , you had your working hours reduced below 30 hours per week and this puts you below both your employer 's and the Federal government 's definition of what a full-time eligible employee is -LRB- 30 or more hours per week defines a person as full-time for benefits eligibility under ObamaCare -RRB- . This could trigger your still being an employee but no longer being eligible for their group health insurance plan . If you are responsible for paying a portion of your health insurance premium -LRB- and most employees are these days -RRB- and for some reason you are unable to pay your share of the premium -LRB- usually hard to do since these payments are generally taken out on a payroll deduction basis -RRB- then you could be terminated for non-payment of premium . Of course , if your employer decides to terminate their group health insurance plan entirely and you are dropped from coverage because a group plan no longer exists at your workplace you are obviously dropped . Though usually even small employers will try to give advance notice and employers -LRB- especially larger ones -RRB- are required to give a certain amount of advance notice of a plan change or termination . But you ca n't be dropped from your employer 's coverage in an arbitrary manner while still an employee meeting all the eligibility requirements set forth under your employer 's personnel policies and state and Federal laws . For example , you could n't be terminated from the health insurance plan simply because your were running up a lot of expenses for your cancer treatment .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
It 's hard to predict how many companies will drop health insurance . However , the number could be significant , although not likely staggering . If they drop coverage for their employees , many companies will have to pay a fine , due to Obamacare . However , they may become much more competitive in the marketplace which will help their productivity .
Grandfather status applies to health insurance plans that have been in force before ACA -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- was passed in March of 2010 . In order to maintain Grandfather status , you must keep the same plan and have no changes made to it since . Any change in deductible or plan type would cause you to loose grandfather status . Is it important ? It depends on what your view of the future is . One side believes grandfather status is important and should be kept if possible . When the health care exchanges open in 2014 , those who are grandfathered will not be required to carry all the new required coverages ACA mandates . Others feel grandfather status is a gimmick and people will eventually lose it . After March of 2010 , no one else could get grandfather status . So that group of people -LRB- insurance policies -RRB- has no new people coming into it to help offset the increase claims that come with age . That grandfathered group of policies will start to see rates increase as claims increase . The healthy will likely drop grandfather status and go to the exchanges . This leaves even fewer health people to offset those who are sick on the grandfather pool , thus cause additional rate increases until everyone on grandfather status drops that coverage . How long that will take is up to debate and will like play out over time . Will it take 3 years or 6 year or more ; no one knows . If you are unsure if you have grandfather status , call your health insurance company and ask . They will be able to tell you .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
The Affordable Care Act aka Obamacare takes over $ 600 million from Medicare to pay for the new health insurance plans . The funds are being taken from providers , doctors , lab & xray facilities , etc. which means providers will be paid less . Since providers are being paid less for their services there has been a decrease nationally of providers accepting Medicare . Last year there was a 9 % drop in Medicare providers with doctors either dropping out of Medicare or not taking new patients . The Medicare Advantage program is also impacted since the law is attempting do reduce the number of participants and payments to providers . If you have Medicare and currently have a doctor you may not see many changes in the near term .
That is a great question ! I 'm glad that you asked it , because I believe that you are representative of a lot of people that fear health issues will keep them from getting life insurance , like pre-existing conditions did with health insurance . Many people are n't aware that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- removed that obstacle , so the perception that having a health issue gets in the way of getting , or affording insurance . Life insurance qualifications take a close look at your health issues , but are n't as strict as you might think . Most insurers will look at your high blood pressure , cholesterol levels , or diabetes , and if they are being controlled by medications , will not count that against you . It 's when these issues are n't being managed that you will have trouble getting or affording the coverage . Many companies will also have a `` look back '' period , where it is only within that period -LRB- usually 2-5 years -RRB- that major health issues are considered . So if you 'd had say , a stroke , but it was 10 years ago , and you 've been on medications and have had great health since , a good independent agent can help you find a policy that wo n't count that stroke against you . I am pleased that you were so careful with being truthful with your answers , that says a lot about your character and honesty . You rock !! I hope that helps you feel better about the question - they are looking for big things , not the little ones , but if you are still worried , just ask your agent , or drop me a line , and if I can help I will . Thanks for asking !
Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- dependent children are allowed to stay on their parent 's health insurance coverage until age 26 . This is without regard to the whether the dependent child is or is not a full-time student , is married , or has coverage available through their own employer . So , in the vast majority of situations a dependent child can not be kicked off their parents coverage until they turn 26 . I say the vast majority of cases because in typical fashion there are these odd quirks in the law that no one read before they passed it . One of those odd quirks applies to what are called `` grandfathered '' health plans -LRB- policies that were in effect prior to the March 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act . Buried in the fine print is a provision that became applicable on January 1 , 2014 . Under this provision , if the adult dependent child does have health insurance available to them through their employer then they can be dropped from their parent 's coverage . As such , whether your parent 's individual or group health insurance plan qualifies as a `` grandfathered '' policy can be a crucial factor in determining the adult dependent 's eligibility for continued coverage .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
The official name for `` ObamaCare '' is the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- . It is also commonly referred to as Obama care , health care reform and the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- was signed into law to reform the health care industry by President Barack Obama on March 23 , 2010 and upheld by the supreme court on On June 28 , 2012 . The goal of healthcare reform is to give more Americans access to affordable , quality health insurance and to reduce the growth in health care spending in the U.S. . The fact is healthcare reform and the newly opened exchanges do not replace private insurance , Medicare , or Medicaid . If you have health coverage you like , you can keep it . Many of the ACA 's numerous provisions have already been enacted . The rest of the program starts in 2013-2014 and continues to roll out until 2022 . Healthcare reform offers a number of new benefits , rights and protections including the requirement that all new health insurance plans cover preventive services and provide new essential health benefits , this includes everything from yearly check-ups , to maternity care , to mental health , to mammograms and colonoscopies , at no out-of-pocket costs . In addition the ACA includes provisions that let young adults stay on their plan until 26 , stop insurance companies from dropping you when you are sick or if you make an honest mistake on your application , prevent against gender discrimination , stop insurance companies from making unjustified rate hikes , do away with life-time and annual limits , and require all insurers to cover people with pre-existing conditions .
That is a great question ! Legally , you should have received some sort of notice that your coverage was being terminated . Is it possible that you may have dismissed a letter from them as junk mail , and missed it ? Either way , they need to have a valid reason for dropping your coverage , and you have a right to know what their reason is . It may be that they have withdrawn from your market , or no longer offer the plan that you were on ; it may be an administrative error -LRB- I 've seen plenty of those over the years -RRB- ; it may be a mistake on your part that you may not be aware of . I 'd recommend that you contact them and find out . Being dropped from your coverage does not mean that you 're out of luck , losing your coverage is a qualifying event for late enrollment in another plan . Head over to the www.healthcare.gov website -LRB- Affordable Care Act , aka Obamacare -RRB- and see if there may be a plan that might be cheaper for you . Who knows , maybe this is a blessing ... Good luck , and thank you for asking !
Yes and No . If you are on a group health plan and you are paying a portion of your health insurance costs on a pre-tax basis under your employer 's Section 125 plan then changes to your coverage status outside of the annual open enrollment period are confined to IRS defined `` change of life status events '' . Examples are marriage , divorce , loss of coverage from a previous job , gaining coverage through a new job , having a child or adopting one . Just because you and the husband had a fight or the family budget has gotten tight does n't qualify . If you are covered through an individual health insurance policy it is easier to drop a dependent from your coverage throughout the year . However , with the new open enrollment requirements of ObamaCare you are running the risk of leaving your husband uninsured and unable to purchase major medical coverage until the next open enrollment period . In addition , you could be creating a tax penalty liability depending upon how long of a period of time you would be leaving your husband uninsured during the year .
That 's a tough one to gauge , because not all health insurers are in every state or every county of the states they are in . And most of the data that is compiled is based off of a limited range of surveying . But , to me , you grade a health insurer 's ethics on several factors : the number of people they serve , the number of complaints ruled against them -LRB- not # of filed , because most complaints that are filed are dropped due to consumer 's misrepresentation -RRB- , their financial stability rating to pay claims , and the strictness of underwriting guidelines and # of denied applications -LRB- though you wo n't have to worry about that for the most part starting Jan 1 , 2014 -RRB- . Those are most important , but you secondly should look at their quality of customer service , their rates , number and quality of providers in their network , and type of plan it is -LRB- HMO , PPO , POS , FFS , ACO , etc. -RRB- . It all depends on how each individual defines ethical . Because you might find a company most ethical because they have the best doctors and hospitals in your area , pay their claims fast , have the best customer claims and billing service , and have the lowest complaints . But to another they 're unethical because their rates are 23 % higher , they do n't cover them across state lines , and they would n't insure their wife because she has diabetes . So , it 's really what you value as ethical . But , the best way to find the best company for you , is to find a good local health insurance broker that represents all insurers in your area and ask them those questions . Because , they will know better than anyone which company is best for you and the most ethical because they have dealt with all aspects with most of them on a regular basis . Plus , having a broker or agent on your side , fighting for you on any wrongdoing by the insurance company , will help your case and make your life a whole lot easier and save you time ... You wo n't just be a policy # in a computer , we help you put a face and story to their considerations ! And , even if after a chat with the broker and them recommending some plans , do your own research on those plans . Here are some good resources to look up plans and companies in your area , and how they stack up . Your State Insurance Department is a good start : WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK
Dependent children are eligible to be covered under their parent 's health insurance plan up to age 26 . Regarding dropping a dependent from your health insurance coverage , itwill depend upon whether you have an individual health insurance policy or whether you are covered under a group health insurance policy that includes a Section 125 plan . If you have an individual policy then it should be a simple matter of contacting your agent or the health insurance carrier and notifying them of your intention to drop the dependent child from your coverage . It is most likely that you will need to complete and sign a termination request form so that all the legalities associated with terminating a person 's coverage are complied with . If you are covering your dependent under your group health insurance coverage through your employer and they have a Section 125 plan in place your situation will be more complicated . If you do n't know what a Section 125 plan is , if you are paying any portion of your health insurance premium and it is being taken out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis then you are almost certainly subject to a Section 125 plan . Check with your HR person , the business owner or their insurance broker to get a definitive answer to this issue . Under IRS regulations because you are enjoying the advantages of pre-tax treatment for your share of your health insurance costs this advantage comes with some strings attached regarding the employee 's ability to change their coverage outside of the group 's normal open enrollment period . Essentially you have to have what is called a `` Change of Life Status Event '' to change your coverage status outside of open enrollment time . These are specific events such as marriage , divorce , adoption , losing coverage that you had elsewhere and a few other circumstances . Just getting mad at your 23 year old son who wo n't get off the couch and plays X-Box all day -LRB- while certainly a problem -RRB- does not meet the criteria of a change of life status event and you would not be able to drop them from your coverage until your group 's next open enrollment .
No American employer is required to provide health insurance to their employees . What the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- imposes is an employer mandate that employers of certain sizes must offer their employees health insurance that meets certain minimum essential benefit coverage requirements and an affordability level to the employee . If such an employer chooses not to offer group health insurance to their employees the employer will be subject to an employer mandate tax penalty charged on a per employee basis . In 2015 employers with 100 + employees will be subject to this requirement with the size threshold dropping to 50 + employees in 2016 . Employers with less than 50 employees are not required to offer coverage . While on the face of it the employer mandate would seem to be an incentive for larger employers to offer health insurance to their employees it 's true effects are yet to be seen and are quite debatable . For example , the cost of the tax penalty is generally far less than the cost of insuring an employee thus perhaps creating an incentive to take the lower cost of the tax penalty and to send your employees to the health insurance marketplaces to buy their own coverage .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Can Your Homeowners Insurance Drop You ?
Your insurance carrier can at their discretion terminate your coverage typically with at least 14 days notice to allow you to secure coverage with another carrier . If you have had numerous or large dollar amount claims within your history with the carrier they may decide that your homeowners coverage is not a risk they are willing to accept any longer .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Unfortunately , the homeowners insurance company has the `` right '' non-renew your coverage each year they renew the policy . It depends on your specific state if they can drop you mid-policy or not . They normally ca n't drop you mid-policy unless they discover a material misrepresentation by you . They can drop you for non-payment , but for a claim they can only non-renew your policy . If you have additional questions please let me know .
That is a great question . The answer is you bet , if you 've done something to deserve it . They can not just decide one day to drop you , but if you have given them a good reason , like misrepresentation of facts , or non-payment of your policy , they will drop you like a bad habit . You may also get dropped for committing an intoxicant related felony like vehicular manslaughter . In any event , the only way they will drop you is if you have earned it . Thanks for asking !
The easy answer to drop your term life insurance is when you goal for that plan is met . For example , if you purchased the plan to cover a 30 year mortgage and paid it off early and have no further need for the protection you should drop it . If the term is met and the rates increased drastically you may want to drop it and apply for another policy if your health is still good . Another scenario may be retirement and the nest egg is fully funded with no unforeseen circumstances , it could be time to drop it or convert it to permanent life insurance or paid up life insurance if the need for a death benefit still exists .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Dropping collision on your car depends on how much you wish to self insure . As long as you do not have a loan you can drop collision anytime . However one of the more common times to consider dropping collision is if your vehicle is worth $ 3500.00 or less . The reason for this thinking is this is the amount uninsured motorist property damage would pick up in the event you are hit by someone with no insurance . Of course your still on your own if you cause the accident or if your involved in a hit and run type situation where you do n't know who caused the accident . You may want to look at what you actually are paying for collision coverage and what the vehicle is worth in a total loss since this is all your going to get .
You employer may drop your health insurance . However , there are many underwater stones involved with this executive decision . For example , the employer can not drop the coverage for you only , except when you , for example moved from Full Time to Part Time and in order to be eligible for benefits you must work full time . Or may be you were moved from employee status to 1099 ? If you 've learned that your employer dropped your health insurance , but other employees of the company still receive this benefit - contact a lawyer . This could be a basis for a lawsuit against your employer .
Can you drop your husband from your health insurance ? Well the answer may vary by state . You may be able to drop your husband , but he will have to agree in writing for it to be done . The reason for this is when a couple divorces a spouse sometimes drops the others coverage without their knowledge . Sort of like emptying the bank account .
Great question ! There would be a couple of immediate results . The first is that you would no longer have the benefit of insurance to help pay for costs should you become sick or injured . Those costs can be devastating to your financial stability . The second is that under the Affordable Care Act , there are penalties for not having insurance , that are leveled when you file your taxes for this year . The health insurance companies limit the ability to enroll in their programs , and many workplace plans will not drop you until the open enrollment period unless you meet specified conditions.Without knowing the reason that you are considering dropping your coverage , I would ask that you would have a plan in place before you actually do drop your coverage . If I can provide more information , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Several things can get you dropped from your auto insurance policy . One could be not making your payments which could result in policy termination . However assuming you make your payment on time the main reason is increased risk . A poor driving record is usually the primary contributor of your policy being non renewed . DUI 's andwrecklessdriving are top of the list or a combination of multiple accidents and moving violations will do it . You wo n't be cancelled for one or sometimes even two accidents but have that third one and in most cases you may be dropped . There are some carriers that do have a no drop promise so something to consider .
Yes , but not just because someone in the front office feels like picking on you that day . There would have to be some change in your eligibility status or what the company 's policy is to trigger such an event . For example , you had your working hours reduced below 30 hours per week and this puts you below both your employer 's and the Federal government 's definition of what a full-time eligible employee is -LRB- 30 or more hours per week defines a person as full-time for benefits eligibility under ObamaCare -RRB- . This could trigger your still being an employee but no longer being eligible for their group health insurance plan . If you are responsible for paying a portion of your health insurance premium -LRB- and most employees are these days -RRB- and for some reason you are unable to pay your share of the premium -LRB- usually hard to do since these payments are generally taken out on a payroll deduction basis -RRB- then you could be terminated for non-payment of premium . Of course , if your employer decides to terminate their group health insurance plan entirely and you are dropped from coverage because a group plan no longer exists at your workplace you are obviously dropped . Though usually even small employers will try to give advance notice and employers -LRB- especially larger ones -RRB- are required to give a certain amount of advance notice of a plan change or termination . But you ca n't be dropped from your employer 's coverage in an arbitrary manner while still an employee meeting all the eligibility requirements set forth under your employer 's personnel policies and state and Federal laws . For example , you could n't be terminated from the health insurance plan simply because your were running up a lot of expenses for your cancer treatment .
Dependent children are eligible to be covered under their parent 's health insurance plan up to age 26 . Regarding dropping a dependent from your health insurance coverage , itwill depend upon whether you have an individual health insurance policy or whether you are covered under a group health insurance policy that includes a Section 125 plan . If you have an individual policy then it should be a simple matter of contacting your agent or the health insurance carrier and notifying them of your intention to drop the dependent child from your coverage . It is most likely that you will need to complete and sign a termination request form so that all the legalities associated with terminating a person 's coverage are complied with . If you are covering your dependent under your group health insurance coverage through your employer and they have a Section 125 plan in place your situation will be more complicated . If you do n't know what a Section 125 plan is , if you are paying any portion of your health insurance premium and it is being taken out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis then you are almost certainly subject to a Section 125 plan . Check with your HR person , the business owner or their insurance broker to get a definitive answer to this issue . Under IRS regulations because you are enjoying the advantages of pre-tax treatment for your share of your health insurance costs this advantage comes with some strings attached regarding the employee 's ability to change their coverage outside of the group 's normal open enrollment period . Essentially you have to have what is called a `` Change of Life Status Event '' to change your coverage status outside of open enrollment time . These are specific events such as marriage , divorce , adoption , losing coverage that you had elsewhere and a few other circumstances . Just getting mad at your 23 year old son who wo n't get off the couch and plays X-Box all day -LRB- while certainly a problem -RRB- does not meet the criteria of a change of life status event and you would not be able to drop them from your coverage until your group 's next open enrollment .
Many people worry that their life insurance policies will drop them if they develop a health condition , as can happen with health insurance . The fact is , if you filled out your life insurance application honestly , complied with whatever they asked you to do , and got a policy , that policy is yours to keep . You can have a heart attack the next month and it will pay the death benefit . You can start smoking the next year and it will pay the death benefit . You can not be dropped over something you did not know ahead of time . Given that type of guarantee , why not lock your life insurance policy in for as long as you can . If you can get coverage for 30 years or a lifetime instead of 10 , have a need for longer coverage , and can afford it , no one can take it away from you as long you keep paying the premiums .
If you have been automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and B , and are still receiving group health benefits elsewhere , you can drop your Medicare Part B by following the instructions that came in your Medicare packet . There is no penalty to sign up later , in that situation . If you have been on Part B and are dropping it for some reason , be sure to call Social Security at 800-772-1213 before dropping it so that you have a thorough understanding of all the implications of that decision .
The single best thing you can do is shop around with other auto insurance companies . Each company is unique in that they have their own appetite for what they like and do n't like . You may fit right into some company 's `` sweet spot '' . But you will never know which companies can beat your current rates . As far as lowering premium on an active policy , you have to be careful . Normally when drivers lower their coverages or cut them out altogether , they tend to make cuts in the wrong areas . It 's important to understand the difference between a controlled risk and an uncontrolled risk . A controlled risk is one where by lowering or dropping coverage , you know the exact dollar amount of the extra risk you are taking on . This includes raising your deductibles on comprehensive and collision coverage -LRB- or dropping it altogether -RRB- , dropping additional coverage such as rental and roadside assistance/towing . Stay away from lowering uncontrolled risks ! Namely liability coverage and uninsured motorist bodily injury coverage . This is where people get burned ! Keep both of these as high as you can afford them .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Medicare Supplement Plan J ?
I found your question to be really interesting . In some states Plan J has been discontiued . In researching your question I found an `` advisor '' on line that emphatically states , '' if you still have this type of policy you should change '' . Then it appears that the Plan J policy has a $ 2000 deductible that has to be paid before any benefits are paid . If this policy has a $ 2000 deductible then I tend to agree with the `` on-line advisor '' and you need to change to a policy that is more commonly sold by the main line companies involved in the medicare supplement business
Medicare Supplement Plan J was a good plan , however , it is no longer offered in any state . Medicare Supplement Insurance Plans can not vary by state . If they stop offering Plan J in one state then they stop in all states . Any person who still has a Plan J can keep that plan the rest of their life if they would like . However , with no new premium coming in from new customers the only way insurance companies can deal with rising healthcare costs will be to raise the premiums on Plan J . It would make sense for someone with Plan J to compare plans to see what is available . Plan F is the most similar to Plan J but Plan G is also something to consider .
Medicare Supplement Plan J was a good plan , however , it is no longer offered in any state . Medicare Supplement Insurance Plans can not vary by state . If they stop offering Plan J in one state then they stop in all states . Any person who still has a Plan J can keep that plan the rest of their life if they would like . However , with no new premium coming in from new customers the only way insurance companies can deal with rising healthcare costs will be to raise the premiums on Plan J . It would make sense for someone with Plan J to compare plans to see what is available . Plan F is the most similar to Plan J but Plan G is also something to consider .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Plan J is a Medicare supplement plan that used to be available in the Medigap marketplace - in short , it was a plan F that included prescription drug coverage . In June 2010 , rules regarding Medicare supplement plans were restructured and supplement plans could no longer include prescription drug coverage . Therefore , plans E , H , I , and J were no longer available for purchase . To get a similar plan structure today , you need to purchase a plan F and a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . If you have an existing one that was already in force before the changes , you can keep it as Medicare supplement plans are guaranteed renewable .
Plan J was one of four plans dropped in June 2010 . The changes were made due to federal legislation passed in 2005 . Although four plans were dropped , two new plans were added resulting in a total of 10 standardized plans -- the original number mandated by Congress in 1990 to simplify and standardize all policies that supplement Medicare . Medigap Plans E , H , I , and J are no longer sold ; however , if you already have one in place , you can keep it . As for current standardized plans , Plan F took the spot for Plan J. Like Plan J , Plan F covers all Medicare approved charges . You do n't have to pay any co-payments , deductibles , or co-insurance . If you have Plan J and your premium is getting uncomfortably high , it might be a good idea to compare premiums to Plan F or any of the other standardized plans available . I hope this answer was helpful . If I can be of further assistance , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 .
I believe what you 're referring to is Plan E - it 's a Medicare supplement plan that used to be available in the Medigap marketplace - in short , it was a Medicare supplement plan that included prescription drug coverage . In June 2010 , rules regarding Medicare supplement plans were restructured and supplement plans could no longer include prescription drug coverage . Therefore , plans E , H , I , and J were no longer available for purchase . To get a similar plan structure today , you need to purchase either a plan F , G , or N -LRB- the most comparable Medigap plans to plan E -RRB- and a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . If you have an existing one that was already in force before the changes , you can keep it as Medicare supplement plans are guaranteed renewable .
Medicare Plan J is a plan that is no longer offered . The people who have Plan J can keep that plan the rest of their life if they want to . The current Plan F would be today 's equivalent . For those people who have Plan J it is important to get a Medicare Supplement review to determine if they can get similar benefits for less money . The premiums on Plan J could increase over time because that plan is no longer taking on new customers . The only way for it to generate revenue is to increase the premium to cover increasing medical expenses on a aging block of business .
Plan J was a Medicare Supplement plan that offered prescription coverage . This plan is no longer available to purchase as of June 2011 . It was a very comprehensive plan . The closest you can purchase to Plan J today is Plan F with a separate Prescription Drug Plan . If you had a Plan J you may have been grandfathered however the Prescription coverage in Plan J was eliminated .
Unfortunately , there is no such thing as Medicare Part J. Medicare consists of 4 parts - Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- , Part B -LRB- medical insurance -RRB- , Part C -LRB- Medicare advantage -RRB- , Part D -LRB- prescription drug coverage -RRB- . In addition to these 4 parts , there are also Medicare supplement programs available for individuals to provide coverage for the gaps in benefits that Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- do not cover . There used to be a Medicare Supplement Plan J , however , in 2010 , this plan was taken off the market along with plans E , H , and I .
Plan H was a Medicare supplement plan that used to be available for purchase - this plan , along with plans E , I , and J were discontinued in June 2010 when the rules were changed so that prescription coverage could no longer be sold with a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- you now have to buy a separate stand-alone part D prescription drug plan -RRB- . Plan H is similar to plan G today , except plan H did not cover Part B excess charges -LRB- Plans F and G do -RRB- . Medicare supplement plans are guaranteed renewable so if you had one before they were pulled from the market , you can still keep it.If you want to secure new coverage that offers more comprehensive benefits , you may want to look into a plan F -LRB- and add a Part D plan for prescription benefits -RRB- .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans -LRB- A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N -RRB- . Plans E , H , I and J are no longer available to purchase . In some states , you may be able to buy a Medigap SELECT policy or a High-Deductible Plan F . The SELECT plans requires you to use specific hospitals . The deductible for High-Deductible Plan F is $ 2,140 in 2014 . Plans F , G , and N are widely sold by most Medicare Supplement insurance companies . They are popular with Medicare beneficiaries for various reasons . Plan F covers all Medicare approved charges . You are not responsible for paying any deductibles , co-pays or excess charges . Plan G is covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 . You have all the same benefits of Plan F after meeting the small deductible . Plan N covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 . You also have co-pays that are never more than $ 20 to any doctor/specialist who accepts Medicare . If you have more questions about Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 .
I found your question to be really interesting . In some states Plan J has been discontiued . In researching your question I found an `` advisor '' on line that emphatically states , '' if you still have this type of policy you should change '' . Then it appears that the Plan J policy has a $ 2000 deductible that has to be paid before any benefits are paid . If this policy has a $ 2000 deductible then I tend to agree with the `` on-line advisor '' and you need to change to a policy that is more commonly sold by the main line companies involved in the medicare supplement business
The first thing to consider is what is important to you . Do you want to minimize out of pocket expenses ? Do you want to be able to see a doctor without a referral ? Do you want the flexibility to see anyone you like ? All true Medigap Plans have a letter to tell you what plan it is -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan G , Plan J , etc. -RRB- . Any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medigap Plan . The best place to start is to call a independent insurance agent that specializes in Medigap Plans . They should be able to show you everything that is available to you in the market and help explain what all the different plans cover . It will save you weeks of research . We have taken it a step further . You can go to our website at SummitMedigap.com and compare Medigap Plans instantly online . We can help answer all your questions at 1-888-407-8664 .
A J code in Medicare is a code used to identify injectable drugs for purposes of billing . The type of injections for which these drugs can be used are intramuscular , subcutaneous , or IV . J codes are also used to designate the generic name and dosage of oral immunosuppressive drugs for billing purposes .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Plan F is the most comprehensive Medigap plan on the market and is very popular . However , depending on your specific needs you may be able save money and get almost identical benefits with a different Medigap Plan . All the Medigap Plans have a letter to tell you what plan it is such as Plan F , Plan J , Plan G , etc. . You will save a lot of time and money by working with an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Plans . They will represent all the major carriers and be able to give you unbiased advice to help you determine which is the best Medigap plan for your needs .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of the cost of your healthcare . In addition , the 20 % that you are responsible for does not have a limit . No max out of pocket or cap so if something major happens you could be left with a lot of very expensive medical bills . Millions of Americans age 65 and over buy a Medigap policy to cover what Medicare Part A & B does not . There are several plans to choose from but all Medigap Plans have a letter such as Plan F , Plan G , Plan J , etc. . If it does n't have a letter it 's not a Medigap Policy . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Kind Of Retirement Plan Is Best ?
The first step is to establish what your effective tax bracket is to determine if you should set up a qualified or non qualified plan . If your tax bracket is low , the deduction may not be as valuable in a qualified plan as the flexibility of a non qualified plan . You also want to assess your risk tolerance to help you select suitable investments that meet your financial profile . Another consideration is whether to set an individual plan or participate with a plan at work . Some employers match portions of your contributions , so it 's important to thoroughly examine your options .
What kind of retirement plan is best ? Well the answer really is the retirement plan you will continue to fund right up into retirement . It is n't the plan as much as it 's the effort to save money . What is the point of deciding the best plan allows you to put 25 thousand a year away when you are n't putting $ 5 away ? The big thing is to decide to make saving a habit . Once you commit to that , then you should look at what is available to you and then you look at expenses of who is handling your money .
What kind of retirement plan is best ? Well the answer really is the retirement plan you will continue to fund right up into retirement . It is n't the plan as much as it 's the effort to save money . What is the point of deciding the best plan allows you to put 25 thousand a year away when you are n't putting $ 5 away ? The big thing is to decide to make saving a habit . Once you commit to that , then you should look at what is available to you and then you look at expenses of who is handling your money .
That is a GREAT question ! The `` twin '' question to `` how much is right '' , is : `` Which KIND is right '' . There are more than 10 types of Life Insurance : at least 3 kinds of `` Term '' insurance , and at least 10 kinds of `` Permanent '' insurance . Which kind is right for you depends on your goals and needs . That would include your family situation , your financial situation , and what and who you want to benefit . Then when all that is determined the amount of benefit can be determined . A kind of `` rule of thumb '' - taken completely out of context with all the other variables is about 8 to 10 years worth of your annual income . But in reality each situation is unique to the individual client . That 's why personally I take an Education and Fact Finding approach to advising my clients on which kind and how much insurance to implement .
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Two questions that are helpful in pointing you in the right direction to find the plan type that 's best for you are : 1 -RRB- do you want the most comprehensive coverage you can get or are you willing to take on a larger share of the risk/costs to keep your premiums down ? 2 -RRB- what is your budget ? maximum dollar you 're willing to spend ? Under the new Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may also want to see if group coverage is available through your employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or youremploymentwas terminated , you lose the coverage . Anindividual plan will stay with you wherever you go . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced broker regarding your coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of products from multiple carriers and work on a personal level with our clients and help them find the coverage that will best serve their needs . Let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much !
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Two questions that are helpful in pointing you in the right direction to find the plan type that 's best for you are : 1 -RRB- do you want the most comprehensive coverage you can get or are you willing to take on a larger share of the risk/costs to keep your premiums down ? 2 -RRB- what is your budget ? maximum dollar you 're willing to spend ? Under the new Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may also want to see if group coverage is available through your employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or your employement was terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced broker regarding your coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of products from multiple carriers and work on a personal level with our clients and help them find the coverage that will best serve their needs . Let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much !
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Two questions that are helpful in pointing you in the right direction to find the plan type that 's best for you are : 1 -RRB- do you want the most comprehensive coverage you can get or are you willing to take on a larger share of the risk/costs to keep your premiums down ? 2 -RRB- what is your budget ? maximum dollar you 're willing to spend ? Under the Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may also want to see if group coverage is available through your employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or youremploymentwas terminated , you lose the coverage . Anindividual plan will stay with you wherever you go . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced broker regarding your coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of products from multiple carriers and work on a personal level with our clients and help them find the coverage that will best serve their needs . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much !
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Two questions that are helpful in pointing you in the right direction to find the plan type that 's best for you are : 1 -RRB- do you want the most comprehensive coverage you can get or are you willing to take on a larger share of the risk/costs to keep your premiums down ? 2 -RRB- what is your budget ? maximum dollar you 're willing to spend ? Under the Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may also want to see if group coverage is available through your employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or youremploymentwas terminated , you lose the coverage . Anindividual plan will stay with you wherever you go . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced broker regarding your coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of products from multiple carriers and work on a personal level with our clients and help them find the coverage that will best serve their needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much !
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There 's no one company that 's necessarily `` the best '' health insurance company.United Health Group -LRB- includes United Healthcare -RRB- is the biggest health insurance company in the United States.Wellpoint -LRB- includes Anthem -RRB- Kaiser , Aetna , Cigna , Coventry , and CareFirst are some of the other big name insurance companies in the country . However , not every company offers health plans in every state . The best kind of health insurance to get is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Under the new Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels of coverage - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or were fired , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go . Because everyone 's needs and budgets are different as well as the plan types available to them , the best thing you can do is talk to an experienced health insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level and review your specific needs and wants regarding your coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
There are a lot of different kinds of annuities available from dozens -LRB- perhaps even hundreds -RRB- of insurance companies . Annuities are offered by insurance companies and primarily used as a means of securing a steady cash flow during retirement years . In many ways , an annuity is very much like a pension plan offered by a company for retirement . Perhaps the best feature of an annuity is safety . Insurance companies are rated as a measurement of financial strength and have proven over the past 125 years or so to have financial stability second to no other type of financial institution . In today 's world where fewer and fewer employers offer a pension , planning for a reasonable retirement income stream seems to be challenging for most workers . An annuity -LRB- or even several -RRB- can provide the type of retirement income security that previous generations have enjoyed . Should an annuity be the only retirement income vehicle for you ? Absolutely not . Your retirement income plan should be balanced in a way that works for you . You should always seek the advice of a qualified retirement income planner so that strategies and products can be tailored to your individual situation .
The advantages of having life insurance is knowing that your financial obligations will be taken care of and not a burden on your survivor . The disadvantage of life insurance is that for the vast majority the insureds do not match their Survivor 's need for cash upon their death with the ` Right Kind ' of insurance plan . Consider for example : a married insured whose Spouse relies upon their income to sustain the expenses of daily living . What is the ` Right Kind ' of Life Insurance plan and what is the ` Right Amount ' of death benefit ? Term Insurance 's disadvantage is the fact that very few deaths occur in the coverage period . Their need for income remains unprotected . Permanent plan 's disadvantage is the fact that only the wealthy can afford the face amounts required to support a Survivor 's need for lifetime income . Reversionary Annuity by design is the ` Right Kind ' of life insurance plan when Survivor Income is the need . It is much more affordable than Permanent plans and 100 % of the Surviving spouses will receive its benefit .
what kind of retirement plan do I have ? I would say the first place to answer that question would be with your employers 's human resources department . If you are self employed or your employer does n't offer a retirement plan , then the question bacomes more of what do you want for a retirement plan ?
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Under the new Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels of coverage - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or were fired , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go . Because everyone 's needs and budgets are different as well as the plan types available to them , you need to talk to an agent about your specific situation so you can review and discuss the available options . If I can be of help , send me a private message using the `` contact me '' button .
What kind of retirement plan is TRS ? A quick search reveals that TRS is short for teachers retirement system . These are state sponsored plans set up to provide retirement benefits for public school educators in their respective states . The plans themselves may be different in each state as well as different within each state as plans are altered at times for new hires . For example in my state there are currently three plans in action for the teachers retirement . The first was closed to new hires in 1977 and has about a 1000 teachers still working . The second was closed about a decade ago and is very different from the first and the third is still different from 1 or 2 . I expect a fourth to be introduced in the next 5 years .
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Under the new Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or were fired , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go .
The best health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Determining which carrier 's health plan will serve your needs best can depend on a number of factors . Several questions that are helpful in pointing you in the right direction to find the plan that 's best for you are : 1 -RRB- do you want the most comprehensive coverage you can get or are you willing to take on a larger share of the risk/costs to keep your premiums down ? 2 -RRB- what is your budget ? maximum dollar you 're willing to spend ? 3 -RRB- what carriers service your area ? 4 -RRB- what type of network do you prefer ? -LRB- e.g. HMO or PPO -RRB- Under the Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may also want to see if group coverage is available through your employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or your employement was terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced broker regarding your coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of products from multiple carriers and work on a personal level with our clients and help them find the coverage that will best serve their needs . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much !
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Under the new Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels of coverage - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may have group coverage available to you through your employer or your spouse 's employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or were fired , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go . Because everyone 's needs and budgets are different as well as the plan types available to them , it 's very helpful to consult with an experienced broker about your specific situation so you can review and discuss the available options - we can help you figure out which plan is going to be the most suitable program for your family 's needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Medical Insurance Mandatory ?
Starting in 2014 the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act or Obamacare requires every American to have health care . You may not have to pay for health care in you economically demonstrate you can not pay by means testing . If you elect not to pay for health care , and by means testing can pay , youll be assessed a penalty at the time of filing your taxes .
There are five states that have mandatory disability insurance laws . These states are : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . The exact provisions of these mandatory disability insurance laws varies by state . You can obtain additional specific information about your state 's mandatory disability insurance law by checking with the states department of insurance -LRB- aka insurance commissioner 's office -RRB- .
Life insurance is not usually mandatory or by law such as car insurance and now health insurance . The exception would be if you were ordered by a judge in a court case such as a divorce or child custody case . The other situation causing life insurance would be a contractual agreement . Some examples of a contractual life insurance agreement would be a secured loan or a business partnership agreement known as `` buy sell life insurance '' . Other than these types of special arrangements life insurance is not considered mandatory , but if someone you care about depends on you for care or finances then out of responsibility you should carry life insurance . Remember life insurance is not for you , it is for them .
Purchasing life insurance is not mandatory , unless it is stipulated in a contract you sign or a loan that you take out . Of course , the insurance company will also decide if you have an insurable interest , allowing you to purchase coverage . But in the vast majority of situations , buying life insurance is not mandatory .
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
That is a great question ! The answer is one of those , `` no , but you should '' answers . Like health insurance is n't mandatory , having it is very wise , and not having it has penalties . It iskind of like that with your prescription coverage . While it is n't mandatory to have , the cost of your prescriptions without it is often prohibitive . A prescription that Medicare covers may only cost you a couple of dollars , that without the coverage would cost $ 45-50 dollars or more . On a fixed income , and looking at stretching a retirement fund , I 'd wholeheartedly recommend that you enroll in the plan . Thanks for asking !
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
Auto insurance is mandatory here in Ohio . As an Ohio broker since 1980 -LRB- Has it been that long ? -RRB- , we help consumers meet the mandatory minimum liability requirement in the most affordable way . By shopping multiple companies , consumers can view and compare the lowest rates . Also , keep in mind that it is always a good idea to consider liability limits higher than what is legally required . Although youthful rates can be a bit expensive , as you get older , rates typically reduce quite a bit . This is an ideal time to review your existing coverage . Ironically , the Ohio state minimum limits were recently increased from $ 12,500 / $ 25,000 to $ 25,000 / $ 50,000 . It had been quite a while since the limits were increased .
PIP refers to Personal Injury Protection . Many states require primary medical coverage as a condition of insurance policies issued in those states . In many cases , PIP included this primary medical benefit in addition to some limited disability . States like Connecticut changed their laws and such coverage is now no longer mandatory . It was replaced with voluntary Primary Medical coverage without any disability benefit included .
If you happen to live in a state where it is mandatory that your car policy includes coverage for primary medical benefits , then that portion of the claim must be handled by your car insurance company first . Once those benefits are exhausted , the claim may then be turned over to your medical insurance provider . States where such coverage is voluntary as opposed to mandated , if you choose to carry medical coverage on your car policy , it would work exactly the same way .
As Mr. Harris indicates , car insurance is mandatory in all States . Mandatory auto insurance limits vary by State , however . The specific limits for your State can be found on your particular State 's Insurance Commissioner website or by simply searching the web for auto liability limits , with the name of your State . Limits vary from $ 10,000 / $ 20,000 / $ 10,000 in Florida -LRB- Yikes ! -RRB- to $ 50,000 / $ 100,000 / $ 55,000 in Wisconsin . The first two dollar amounts are for bodily injury from an accident and the third amount is for property damage to others , from that accident . For example : Using Wisconsin limits , In an insured driver 's liability situation , the policy would pay no more than $ 50,000 to any one injured person but no more than $ 100,000 , no matter how many people were injured . So , if three people were injured and two of them received $ 50,000 each , the third injured person would not be collecting from the policy , since the $ 100,000 limit would have been exhausted . As for the property damage to others , the policy would pay no more than $ 55,000 in total to one or more claimants . .
Yes , you can be declined for a medical condition and/or adverse health history as it pertains to `` morbidity '' . Morbidity involves a reduced ability to perform mental or physical activities . Such ailments as arthritis , cognitive impairment , Alzheimer 's disease , advanced osteoporosis , lung malfunction , and blindness are all classified under morbidity . If one uses tobacco and has any morbidity issue , that usually results in a decline as well , but smoking by itself does not often result in a decline.Underwriting for long-term care insurance is getting tighter . Genworth , for instance , will soon be requiring some medical work for applicants , which may include lab tests -LRB- urine sample and blood draw -RRB- . Carriers are also moving toward gender-based premiums , with male applicant costs being lower than female applicant costs due to the fact that more women go on claim than men . This is also true for most insurance , so it 's not a new concept . Life insurance costs are higher for men than women because women live longer . Disability Insurance has had gender-based rates for quite a while . Only Montana has mandatory uni-sex rates for all insurance.Before submitting a formal application for long-term care , an applicant should be pre-screened by completing a medical questionnaire provided either by the carrier or the representing agent . Applicants should answer all answers truthfully and completely to determine medical eligibility . It is better to be told not to submit an application due to confidential prescreening than have a formal application declined .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
Medicare is available and is almost mandatory for everyone over age 65 . Your employer will normally have included that consideration when the company adopted a health insurance program . You will probably be required to enroll in Medicare part A . There is n't a cost for most participants . If you are receiving medical benefits from your employer you may be allowed to defer the purchase of Medicare part B . You can usually defer that until you end your employment and lose medical benefits . It is important that you contact Medicare when you are leaving employment so that the switch to Medicare B is seamless and your coverage is at the standard price . There is a penalty if you enroll late
The word `` affordable '' is really a perception . Up until the massive rate increases occurred due to Obamacare I felt that most health policies were affordable . We have to remember that each of us only have so much money to spend and we have to prioritize our bills and all insurances are necessary for protection but only auto and home insurance are mandatory but we find a way to pay for it . The good news is that health insurance coverage is flexible with deductibles and co-insurance but I always recommend the HSA qualified plan has a slightly higher deductible with no coinsurance and with this you can save 30 % or more in premium and have the option to open a health savings account with any bank and the money deposited into that account is tax deductible and tax free when used to pay any medical expenses . The bottom line is that you need to take responsibility for the everyday medical problems such as doctor visits and pharmacy and be covered for the catastrophic things that may occur . Feel free to call me anytime to answer any of your questions or for quotes . The Hinch Financial Group , Ronald G Hinch 843-450-9879 .
Renters insurance is not mandatory , however it 's a good idea to have and affordable . Your landlord policy only covers the structure and not your personal items . It may even help reduce your auto policy by having renters insurance . Renters insurance policies cover medical bills for someone hurt when they visit you , it covers liability claims in case someone is injured on your rented property as well . It also covers your personal items in case of fire or a complete loss . Allen Beach
Excellent question and one about which there is much confusion these days . As a general rule , most health insurance policies do not cover routine eye exams -LRB- this would be different from an eye exam required to diagnose and/or treat a medical condition like Macular Degeneration -RRB- . Many employers and a growing number of individuals insure their vision care needs through separate Vision Insurance policies that do cover eye exams , lenses , frames , contact lenses , etc. . Where things get more confusing , and sometimes frustrating for the consumer , is in understanding some of the new benefits mandated by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . One of these mandatory benefits is that coverage for pediatric vision and dental be included in health insurance policies sold on or after January 1 , 2014 . So , you may be paying for a vision benefit that only your children can use and if you have no children you are paying for a benefit you , as an adult , can not use . The consumer should not assume that even if their new ObamaCare compliant policy is in place that this will translate into effective coverage for your dependent children . Each insurance carrier has designed their benefit plans differently in regard to the vision & dental requirements . Some make it an upfront benefit similar to vision insurance coverage you may have seen in the past while others require that the major medical plan 's deductible be met before such services would be reimbursed . So , if you have a Bronze plan with a $ 6000 deductible you technically have some vision coverage for dependent children but no effective coverage until you have met the $ 6000 deductible first . Buyer beware is my advice and the consumer should carefully research this benefit area in the various health insurance options you might be considering . This is another example of where an experienced and knowledgeable health insurance broker can be invaluable in helping you select the health insurance plan best suited to your needs and budget .
PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection . PIP covers medical expenses from an auto accident . This is a no-fault coverage and will pay out regardless of fault . Not all states have PIP coverage however in some states PIP is mandatory . It is possible depending on the loss that PIP could cover lost wages and other damages . Consult your local agent about PIP coverage .
end question
start question
home-insurance
When Can You Cancel Homeowners Insurance ?
You can cancel homeowner 's insurance at any time . You simply notify your existing insurance company and indicate the date that you wish to terminate coverage . However , if you have an existing mortgage , your loan company may have something to say about the termination of the mortgage . And under the terms of the loan , you may not be able to end your policy without some ramifications .
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
Yes an insurance company can non-renew your homeowners insurance policy for several reasons . Main reasons are change in risk . This could be due to claims or hazards on your home that have increased and as a homeowner you fail to mitigate . In other words if the insurance carrier can no longer tolerate you as a risk the insurance carrier can chose non renew . Keep in mind all polices are self terminating at the end of a term and the insurance company can chose at that time to either offer a renewal or chose to not renew . This is not an actual cancellation . Cancellations are actually much more difficult . The only way a cancellation occurs is if you the insured fail to make a payment or often on a newly written policy a hazard was not dealt with or there was mis-representation on the application . These types of cancellations however fall on the insured and not the insurance provider .
There are a number of circumstances when an insurance company can and will cancel a homeowners policy . The company can cancel if you have committed fraud . The company can cancel if the agent exceeded his or her authority . The company can cancel if the premium was not received by the due date . State law dictates the amount of notice the company must give you . The company may choose to non-renew a policy when the circumstances of the risk have changed . In such a case the policy runs its full term but there would not be an offer to renew and the coverage would cease .
A homeowners policy can always be cancelled for non-payment of premium . In addition to the representations made to the agent , the underwriter also can order an on-site inspection . If the property isnt as described the policy can be cancelled . Some specific issues might be the presence of an aggressive dog , or poor maintenance of the home or grounds . Mortgage companies also report to insurance companies when a residence is vacant . The insurance company is likely to cancel the homeowners policy .
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
Universal life policies are somewhat tricky . What happens when you cancel a universal life policy depends on when you cancel the policy . In the beginning years of a UL it has no cash value accumulated , so if you cancel during that stage nothing happens other than the policy terminates . You get no money back . In the mid range years of the policy it will likely have some cash value , so if you cancel it during that period you may receive the cash value . In the later years of a UL , unless you have kept pace with the increasing `` cost of insurance '' , -LRB- in other words paid increasingly higher premiums -RRB- , the cash value that has accumulated may be reduced by they increasing cost of insurance until there is no more cash value remaining . At that point the policy may terminate . So if you cancel the policy while it has cash value you will receive the cash value . If there is no cash value when you cancel the policy it will simply terminate .
Homeowners Insurance can be cancelled at any time by the Insured . The Insured may be required to submit a signed request to cancel the policy ; it is important to purchase a new policy and make sure it is effective the same date as the cancellation of your old policy . All policies have a Standard Time of inception and expiration at : 12:01 a.m. . There is an online link available to obtain a quote and purchase Home Insurance directly online in multiple States . The link is : WEBSITELINK If the reason for changing carriers is due to an issue with an inspection which was conducted -LRB- interior or exterior -RRB- on your property , we must advise that all carriers are now inspecting risks which means you will most probably have the same issue with another carrier . On the other hand , an insurance carrier has legal restrictions regarding the cancellation of an insurance policy ; they may only cancel a policy for any underwriting reason during the first 60 days of a new insurance policy . They may cancel a policy at any time for non-payment of premium following the State requirement for legal notice .
When you buy a home insurance policy , its not a contract for life . If you are unhappy with your current coverage , you can easily switch to a new home insurance company . Before making this move , there are just a few things you need to do beforehand . The first thing you should do is review your current insurance policy . See when it is scheduled to end as well as if there are any costs for ending your contract early . For example , if you cancel a prepaid policy , some companies give you your unearned premium payments back while others will not . Check to see if it makes more financial sense to cancel the policy or just wait for it to expire . When you decide to make a move , you can contact your new insurance company and ask them to set up your new policy . You will need to fill out a short application to set up your coverage . When you submit your application , be sure to include your insurance premium as well . You wont be covered until after the insurance company receives your premium payment . Once your new policy is up and running , you can cancel your old policy . Call up your old company and tell them you want to end your coverage . They will mail you a document telling you your coverage is over and will also return any money they might owe you . After you finish cancelling your policy , you have finished switching home insurance companies .
Homeowners policies are traditionally one year policies . However , if the policy is cancelled , the unused portion of the premium will be returned to you . Most companies cancel policies using a pro rata cancellation . That means that you will get exactly the percentage of the premium as the percentage of the remaining days of the policy . Other companies use a short rate cancellation which will penalize you slightly for cancelling before the end of the policy period .
Homeowners policies are not cancelled very often . Sometimes a company will decide to withdraw from a market . If your company decides to not renew your policy they must give you adequate legal notice , unless it is for non-payment of premium . If the company has cancelled your coverage you can contact a reliable agent that you trust and apply elsewhere for coverage . If the cause of the cancellation is excessive claims , you might find the search difficult . There are companies that deal with hard to place homeowners policies .
That is a great question ! Yes , you can cancel the contract with the company , and the company can cancel it also . They will cancel the policy if they find that you were dishonest when applying , or failed to make timely payments . You can cancel in writing , or by choosing to no longer make payments . I 'd suggest that you speak with an agent before cancelling your policy , there are some things that you should know before you do . If you would like more detail , please contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Certainly , but you do not want this situation as most policies contain a ` other insurance ' clause in them and this could create problems you do not need in the event of a loss/claim occurringin the ` overlap ' period . Follow the cancellation procedures outlined in the policy you desire to cancel and have no gap between the cancelled policy and the replacement policy . DO NOT RELY ON A NEW BROKER OR AGENT TO CANCEL YOUR EXISTING POLICY WITHOUT GETTING DOCUMENTATION IN WRITING THEY ARE SENDING APPROPRIATE CANCELLATION DOCUMENTS AND EVIDENCE TO YOUR CURRENT CARRIER . Remember , the contract is between you and your current carrier and only you -LRB- the named insured -RRB- can request cancellation of your policy . Also be aware that ` auto pay ' or ` EFT ' payment modes on an existing policy may not be terminated immediately and your account may be ` swept ' for a premium due within the next 21 to 30 days . Make sure your auto pay or EFT plan is terminated asap -LRB- and get evidence -RRB- when your policy is cancelled .
A homeowners policy is a legal contract . While the company has stated obligations , so do you . If you fail to live up to one of those obligations such as bringing a vicious dog onto your property , the company can cancel coverage . There are other reasons that a company can give . Surprisingly , people abandon their property . When the company discovers this situation they start proceedings to cancel the coverage . Of course , they can always cancel you for not paying your premiums on time .
Can you cancel your term life insurance ? Yes , you can cancel a term policy a couple of ways . First , simply let the insurance company know in writing that you wish to cancel . They will cancel on the date asked for or the date of receipt of the letter if no cancelation date is given . They will refund any premium unused . The second way is to let the premium lapse . Why would you do it this way ? Because it gives you a grace period to really be sure it 's what you want to do . I remember my first day in this business , there was a couple of people in the office crying in loud voices , `` but he did n't mean it '' . They were there trying to reinstate a policy that the owner had just cancelled and died like a week later . There was the letter from the insured , demanding his policy be cancelled on a certain date and it was . Unfortunately , he died a few days after .
When you cancel your Life Insurance policy , you are not only giving up the coverage you purchased but you may also be giving up your insurability and cost of insurance . When you applied for the coverage you are considering cancelling , you went through underwriting to determine if you are `` insurable '' . While you are insured , if your health was to deteriorate , the insurance company still maintains the coverage you have . If after cancelling your policy , your health starts to suffer , then when you try to reapply for another Life Insurance policy , you may not be insurable and at best you will have to pay more in premium . Plus consider you will be older which also increases your premium . I recommend that you talk to your broker/agent first to discuss your situation and see the alternatives you have .
You have significant power to walk away from any insurer . Most states operate with regulations regarding how a cancellation in mid term is treated . Before you leap to canceling your Progressive policy , check with the Insurance department in your state . They will know whether there is a requirement to pro rate the premium or not . Pro rated cancellations are the norm and this is how that works . If you cancel an annual policy for which you paid the whole premium and you cancel at exactly six months , then the company will return to you 50 % of the premium . So , just make sure what the cancellation requirements are in your state .
A homeowners policy can be cancelled if the home is not as represented in the application . A recent client indicated that they didnt have any pets . When a company representative visited the home they were introduced to the familys favorite pit bull . This resulted in a cancellation letter . There are other similar situations . Of course , the policy can always be cancelled for not paying the premium . In fact most companies have very little tolerance for late payments on any property policy .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Auto Insurance Decrease At Age 25 ?
Auto insurance policies typically have a reduced rating classification for drivers at the renewal following their 25th birthday . This primarily adjusts the rating from a previously youthful class to an adult class , and usually comes out to be a slightly lower rate than before . Depending on the company , there are a few other ways to get adult classification , for example if you were married .
Your auto insurance coverage certainly does n't decrease but the premium you pay for it usually will if you have a good driving record . When you reach age 25 and have not had tickets or accidents that resulted in insurance claims , you are considered less risk to the insurance company . They will usually lower your rate but even if they do , that is a great time to Reshop the rate with several other companies . You will usually see even more savings that way .
In California age is not a rating factor . Experience is a rating factor . Some companies change rating factors every four years . Once the driver has eight years of experience he is charged the standard rate . If the driver has not had more than one point assessed they also receive a good driver discount that substantially alters the premium .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
In Montana the average rate decrease after you turn 25 is $ 200.00 every 6 months depending on the carrier . This does n't factor in if the carrier had a rate increase for your area which then the decrease may not be as much . This also does n't take into consideration your driving history . But in most states and most carriers the rates do decrease after the age of 25
With Most carriers the case is yes . The average rate decrease in our state with most carriers is $ 200 decrease on a 6 month policy . Many carriers at your renewal if you turned 25 shortly after your renewal the rate should reflect that you will be 25 on the renewal term . Or ask your agent to requite you after you turn 25 it should lower it .
Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . You can send me a private message if you need assistance with your program .
This question typically arises in the context of an insurance consumer questioning if the auto insurance premium will decrease as the insured vehicle ages and therefore decreases in value . Years ago , all things equal , meaning no general across the board rate increase , the physical damage portion of the policy did indeed decrease as the car value decreased . In today 's world , with the myriad of rating factors determining an individual auto insurance premium you should no longer expect an annual decrease as the car ages . Your agent can provide more insight into your specific situation .
Term life insurance is n't necessarily better than permanent life insurance - each has their own pros and cons . In short , it depends on what you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. covering a mortgage vs. estate planning -RRB- . The big advantage of term insurance is you 're getting more `` bang for your buck '' so-to-speak - meaning the rate per $ 1,000 of coverage that you 're paying is much less than permanent coverage , however , the trade-off is that you only get to pay that rate for a short amount of time -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- whereas your rates can be locked in for life with a permanent insurance policy . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the policy changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis -RRB- . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . You can send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button if you would like assistance with your program .
The major advantage of term insurance is you 're getting more `` bang for your buck '' so-to-speak - meaning the rate per $ 1,000 of coverage that you 're paying is much less than permanent coverage , however , the trade-off is that you only get to pay that rate for a short amount of time -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- whereas your rates can be locked in for life with a permanent insurance policy . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the policy changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis -RRB- . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an experienced life insurance broker to review your specific situation and help determine what life insurance will be most suitable to meet your needs and budget , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Your auto insurance coverage certainly does n't decrease but the premium you pay for it usually will if you have a good driving record . When you reach age 25 and have not had tickets or accidents that resulted in insurance claims , you are considered less risk to the insurance company . They will usually lower your rate but even if they do , that is a great time to Reshop the rate with several other companies . You will usually see even more savings that way .
That is a great question ! The rates for auto insurance are based on a great number of things , and age is one of them . The data from the Insurance Institute of Highway Safety shows that statistically , drivers tend to be safer once they reach the age of 25 . Being married , how long you 've been driving , even your gender can all be factors in the rates . So some companies may lower your rate after your 25th birthday , but some may not . There are just about as many factors that determine your rate increase or decrease as there are companies selling the insurance . If yours does n't , then shop around and see if there is one that is cheaper . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Age 25 is usually when you see a decrease if you do n't have any tickets or accidents prior to rate . You will also see a decrease if your married . Taking defensive driving course within 3 years and \ or multi-policy discount such as a house will help depending on the insurance company .
This can vary from carrier to carrier and may be also vary depending on geographic location and sex of the insured . Many male drivers experience some decrease in premiums around age 25 . While many for many females a decrease in premiums may be experience around 23 . Each carrier sets there own standards when it comes to their rate equations . Contact your local agent to find out more about your current carrier 's standards .
This can actually be a bit of a loaded question because the type of coverage you 're looking for , your need , your risk class , premium tolerance , and a number of other factors will really direct where you should go to buy your insurance . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage -LRB- a combination of benefits -RRB- - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . You can also create a combination of benefits by having some a larger sum total of term insurance for the first part and have it drop to a lower amount for the back end of a given length of time -LRB- e.g. you have $ 1,000,000 for the first 20 years and then have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 -RRB- . A brief description of the two types of coverage are as follows : Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . It 's always advisable to consult with an experienced life insurance broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on the need . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . A brief description of the two types of coverage are as follows : Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The short answer is : it depends on the need . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . A brief description of the two types of coverage are as follows : Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on the need . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . A brief description of the two types of coverage are as follows : Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . You can send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button if you would like assistance with your coverage .
Life insurance companies use formulas to determine how much term life insurance you qualify for . It is not a bad guide for determining how much life insurance you need . At younger ages , they will allow you to take out about 25 times your annual income . E.g. . If you make $ 40,000 per year , you could get about $ 1,000,000 of coverage . That factor gradually decreases to about 10 times your annual income at retirement age , even less in your old age . However , insurance companies take assets into account , so if you have many assets , you may need more life insurance than that factor indicates .
The total face amount of term life insurance is limited by two things , your net worth and annual income . Typically you will be able to purchase enough life insurance to cover your debts and at least 10 times your income . There is a formula based on age that dictates the maximum amount of term life insurance allowed . Its starts in your twenties as 25 times income and decreases depending on each carriers formula , every new decade of life . For example , in your 30s it is 20 times , your 40s 15 times , etc. . This does vary by company .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Get A Life Insurance Policy On Someone Else ?
In order to purchase life insurance on another party , there are a few things that must happen first . One is there must be an insurable interest . This means that you must sustain a financial loss of income or debt in order to have an insurable interest . Second , the person must be willing to take out the life insurance policy . You may be the owner and payer but they will be the insured . They must go through underwriting for health , life style , income , etc. .
To get a life policy on another they must be finacially dependant upon , or have insurable interest . They must be knowledgeable of the policy . Some companies do not allow if not in the immediate family range , however , if you take out the policy you will be the policy owner and them the insured . Why not have them be the policyholder and insured and you the payor of the policy . Makes more sense and is more of a positive notation .
To get a life insurance policy on someone else , it is a good idea to start out discussing it with them . Get their exact date of birth , height , weight , whether they have used any tobacco in the past three years , and any medications they are taking . Ask about whether they have any health conditions now or in the past . Nothing is more frustrating that being declined for life insurance when it was not your idea to get it in the first place . Involving that person , explaining why you are getting it , discussing who will pay for it , and asking whether they care if they take an exam , are all ways to help the policy be placed smoothly and without hard feelings .
Getting a policy on someone else is just like getting a policy on yourself with one exception . If this is on an adult , they have to be aware and sign the policy which is being taken out on them . They have to sign off . If this is on a child , there has to be an owner , usually a parent or grand parent .
Yes , when someone gets life insurance on someone else , the person who purchased the policy is the policy Owner . The other person whose life is being insured , is called the Insured . It is the Owner who makes the decisions about the policy , such as naming the beneficiary , which bank account to pay the premium from , etc. . Obviously , you would want everything to be above board if you were going to be the Insured in a policy owned by someone else . One reason someone might want to own a policy on someone else 's life is if they would suffer a great loss if that person died . E.g. . The Insured owed the Owner a great deal of money , and the life insurance policy would repay that debt if the borrower died . Or the Insured owned the home where the policy Owner was living , and that policy would enable the policy owner to purchase the home when the Insured person died . Unless there is a very close family tie , this type of insurable interest in actually required in order to take out a life insurance policy on someone else .
If you mean , can you pay for a policy for someone else so that there will be a death benefit when they die , the answer is : usually . Most people who buy term life insurance for someone else do it to protect themselves in some way . E.g. . That other person may owe them money , or the Payer knows he/she will have the task of paying for the funeral if the other person dies . Life insurance companies look carefully if the Payer is also the Owner of a policy in which someone else is the Insured . They are not as concerned if you simply pay for a policy for someone else and allow the Insured to own their own policy .
Life insurance demonstrates that you love someone else . If your death is going to have an impact on someone you love , then life insurance can help -LRB- perhaps a great deal . -RRB- Sometimes life insurance is required to protect the interest of a lender or a contract holder -LRB- who you might not love . -RRB- In the end , though , most life insurance is purchased because people love each someone else .
Yes , you can get Life Insurance on someone else . Refer to Peggy 's comment on insurable interest . Here are a few situations which you can look at getting life insurance on someone else -LRB- keep in mind , for anyone over 18 , they have to sign the application as well -RRB- : Parent insuring children , Spousal insurance , Insuring a Key -LRB- important -RRB- employee or insuring your business partner so if he passes , you can purchase his ownership from his family . If you have a situation that I did not cover here as there are more , reach out to your broker or contact one of us .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries .
If the policy is on you and you are owner of the policy , you can generally name whoever you want as beneficiary . If you own the policy on the life of someone else , then the beneficiary should have an insurable interest with the insured -LRB- e.g. you buy a policy on your child and name their live in partner as beneficiary -RRB- . If you are able to purchase a policy on someone else , you already have an insurable interest in the insured , so can be the beneficiary yourself , in most situations . Keep in mind that different life insurance companies can have different determinations of what is allowed . Check with a broker beforehand to find out which carriers will work with you to set up the type of policy arrangement you need , or to set up your policy in another way to accomplish your goals .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
Is borrowing against a policy a good idea ? Yes , it can be , it can depend though . Keeping the policy in force is important as it creates some tax advantages on the funds borrowed as you are essentially taking a part of your death benefit early for use elsewhere . Where borrowing against your life insurance is a good idea is in what steps you have to take to do compared to other avenues . Have you ever sat in a bank office cubicle while someone else decides if your need is worthy enough ? How they have to decide if your need fits ? A great thing about borrowing against your value is you simply make a call and the money is wired to your bank account . You are not asked to explain your need , your need is not subjected to review by somebody else . Simply put , what you want to do with those funds is not subject to the approval of somebody else .
In order to buy life insurance for someone else , the person being insured must give consent to the policy , sign the application , and cooperate with underwriting requirements -LRB- be that a phone interview , exam , or whatever is asked -RRB- . It is not possible to purchase a policy for someone else without their knowing it .
Policy ownership is what determines whether the policy is included in a person 's estate for estate tax purposes . Having someone else own the policy will keep it out of the estate , but you also lose some control . The owner , not the insured , has control over the policy , so having someone else own the policy can be risky . Irrevocable Life Insurance Trusts could be used in large estates , but is overkill for most people . Keeping the life insurance out of your estate for tax reasons may not be a big issue but it depends on the total size of your estate and what trade-offs you are willing to accept to keep the insurance out of your estate .
You can be listed as a driver on someone else 's auto insurance , they would need to request the addition to their policy . Adding additional drivers can cause an increase in the rate depending on the driving record of the person being added as well as their driving experience , younger less experinced drivers do tend to cause a policy to go up . If you are driving someone else 's vehicle you should look into being added to the policy .
You can put a life insurance policy on someone else if you have an insurable interest in that person . That means that , if they passed away , it would hurt you financially . E.g. you could take out life insurance on someone to whom you loaned a large amount of money , so that you would get your money back if that person died . Life insurance companies look at immediate family relationships as an emotional loss when death occurs , which justifies financial remuneration . However , even taking out a life insurance policy on a relative will have some financial considerations in determining how much you can put on them .
No , you can not get life insurance on anybody , and not everybody can get life insurance on you . In order to get life insurance on the life of someone else , the owner of the policy must have some financial connection to that person . If it is not a close relative , an eligible person may be someone who owes you a substantial amount of money , for whom your are providing a home , or some other insurable interest . That guideline helps prevent people from taking out policies on others just to make a windfall , or even for criminal intent .
end question
start question
annuities
Where Do Annuities Invest ?
Life insurance companies primarily purchase investment grade government bonds , i.e. class I and II . Some companies use indices as their crediting method using indexed options . Other companies use separate sub account crediting methods linked to equity and bond instruments that are not part of the company 's general account .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
Where are annuities invested ? Well the way to find out is review the insurance company that you bought from financials . There you can get an idea of where they invest to support the annuities they sell . Usually annuities will be invested in safe investments because they have a guaranteed return . The advantage insurance companies possess is the size of the investment . When investing millions to billions they can get a better interest rate on their money compared to someone wanting to invest a few thousand .
The single premium immediate annuity is the policy from which every other annuity begins . This policy pays a lifetime steam of income in exchange for a lump sum of money . The first alteration was the deferred annuity where the payments did not start within a year but were deferred until later ; these usually allow you to contribute more to the annuity . Then there is the issue of where the money in the annuity is invested . Some are in company funds , some are in separate accounts and some are hands-on investments where the annuitant directs the investments . There are variations of these basic plans that appeal to some people and meet specific needs .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
In Canada , deferred annuities are considered to be insurance policies . Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIAs -RRB- are similar to Guaranted Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- the interest and principle in both are guaranteed . An example of the Guaranteed Investment Annuity 's `` insurance element '' is the annuity or monthly income . Guaranteed Investment Funds -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , are segregated funds and are similiar to mutual funds.The funds invested in both are at risk . However , Guaranteed Investment Funds , in addition to the annuity or income element offer maturity and death guarantees of 75 % to 100 % . These investment vehicles offer benefits that could prove to be valuable . For more information please visit JPW.ca or contact me via this web site .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
I 'm going to keep this simple and generic as we can spend a lot of time reviewing this question . First , what is an annuity ? An annuity is simply a contract between you and an insurance company where they offer market like gains or guaranteed gains like in a CD over a length of time , usually anywhere from 3 to 15 years . A fixed annuity simply means the money is not invested in the market although growth may be tied to gains but you will not get 100 % of gain but you also will not see the losses either due to the downside guarantees . A variable annuity invests money in the market with all the risks associated to market investing . There usually are death benefit guarantees where if you die before taking money out , the initial amount of premium is returned to your heirs . Please contact a registered representative to get more details and a prospectus .
The challenge to answering the question `` Will annuities increase ? '' is that the answer depends on the context of the question . I will provide an answer for different situations and if you would like further clarification you can contact me . In Canada , there are basically two type of annuities , immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities provide an income in exchange for a lump sum . With a deferred annuity , the income is in the future , Deferred annuities are often used as an accumulation or investment vehicle . When the investment options are guaranteed , it is similar to a guaranteed investment certificate , GIC , and could increase through interest growth . In Canada , variable deferred annuities are often referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . These are similar to mutual funds and their value can increase or decrease depending on the fund -LRB- s -RRB- performance . Since they are issued by insurance companies , seg funds do offer minimum death and maturity guarantees , typically 75 % or 100 % . Some companies also offer resets or the locking in of gains , the full details of which are outlined in the plan 's information folder . One major factor in determining the income provided from immediate guaranteed annuities is long term interest rates . If rates increase , the amount of income provided will also increase . The income from an immediate annuity can also increase after issue depending on the terms of the contact . An indexed annuity for example can provide for an increase in income each year . Another option would have part of the income dependent on the performance of a fund or pool of funds , where the income would increase or decrease depending on the funds ' performance . This is a basic overview of a potentially complex subject . Do not take any action without consulting a licensed professional . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Deferred annuities are used as money accumulation vehicles , since they are issued by insurance companies they have features and guarantees other investments can not match . These are of particular interest to self - employed -LRB- any age -RRB- , OR those within 10 to 15 years of retirement or already retired . Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIAs -RRB- are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- more information is available at www.GuaranteedInterest.ca In Canada , variable annuities are called segregated funds or seg funds they are similar to mutual funds . More information available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca Immediate annuities provide a guaranteed income stream in exchange for a lump sum premium . They are used as part of a retirement income strategy to provide stability.They are often used to build a guaranteed income to cover fixed expenses . If have assets that are generating interest income and you do not need access to all the capital during your lifetime , the `` insured annuity strategy '' is worth exploring . The objective is to increase your current after tax income while preserving your asset for your heirs . Not for everyone , but the results can be quite dramatic , so it is worth a look . Annuities can also be used to assist in a number of personal and corporate planning strategies , too numerous and complex to be cover here . In Canada , if you are over 65 , income from Interest from a prescribed non-registered annuity qualifies for the $ 2,000 pension tax credit . Note : Interest from a Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also qualifies . GIAs are like Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- but the are issued by insurance companies . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
What do annuities invest in ? Well the easiest way to find out is to review the insurance company 's financial statements . This will give you a good idea of where they look to gain returns from . Usually insurance companies are risk adverse with their investment choices and tend to look for long term investments . This is also a reason they have attached such a long surrender window on annuities . The idea is to invest long term for annuities , rather than short term .
That is a great question ! They can be , a great investment , depending upon your financial situation . An agent will do what is called a `` suitability study '' with you to determine whether an annuity is right for you . The suitability study is designed to see if the investment in an annuity is a safe investment for you to make - is it financially safe , will it meet your retirement needs , and does it fall within the tolerable amount of risk that you are comfortable with . Annuities are not very flexible for a period of time when it comes to the money that you invest . There are large fees and penalties , and much damage done to the earnings potential if you need to take back money from your annuity in the first years of the contract . This period is called the `` surrender period '' , and may last as long as 10 years . That makes an annuity something that should be seriously considered only if you have some safeguards in place , and have a good cash flow . That said , if it is a suitable investment , then it can be a terrific one to make . Annuities can guarantee an income that you ca n't outlive , and with our increasing lifespans that is a great thing to have ! There are some really good annuity products out there , and the indexed ones have some great earning potential and guarantees . If there are specific questions that you have , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
There 's a big difference between the two . A mutual fund is an investment vehicle operated by an investment company which pools the assets of many individuals . The money raised is then invested in accordance with pre-defined goals . Money market funds : These funds invest in a variety of short term , money market debt such as Treasure bills or commercial paper . Growth funds : have an emphasis on long-term capital growth , usually through investment in common stock . Income funds : Focus on providing high , current income , using bonds and other income producing securities . Balanced funds : strive to provide income and long-term capital gain . Both stocks and bonds are used . Keep in mind that mutual funds have risk and you can lose money.Non-qualified tax deferred annuities have basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money .
A mutual fund is an investment vehicle operated by an investment company which pools the assets of many individuals . The money raised is then invested in accordance with pre-defined goals . Money market funds : These funds invest in a variety of short term , money market debt such as Treasure bills or commercial paper . Growth funds : have an emphasis on long-term capital growth , usually through investment in common stock . Income funds : Focus on providing high , current income , using bonds and other income producing securities . Balanced funds : strive to provide income and long-term capital gain . Both stocks and bonds are used . Keep in mind that mutual funds have risk and you can lose money . Non-qualified tax deferred annuities have basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Who Is The Guarantor On Health Insurance ?
Your question does not have an easy or simple answer . When you receive treatment from a medical provider you accept financial responsibility for claims not paid by your health insurance carrier . The health insurance company is a guarantor of sorts -LRB- if you have a fully insured plan -RRB- but there may also be other carriers backing them up . With self funded health insurance your employer or union is the guarantor and they may have reinsurance in place to back them .
Your question does not have an easy or simple answer . When you receive treatment from a medical provider you accept financial responsibility for claims not paid by your health insurance carrier . The health insurance company is a guarantor of sorts -LRB- if you have a fully insured plan -RRB- but there may also be other carriers backing them up . With self funded health insurance your employer or union is the guarantor and they may have reinsurance in place to back them .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Many employees have been surprised and concerned to see the value of their employer provided health insurance being reported on their W2 's . This is a requirement of the Affordable Care Act . Under transitional relief guidelines issued , so far only employers who issue 250 or more W2 forms in a calendar year are required to report this information . Eventually all employers who provide health insurance to their employees will be required to report this information on the employee 's W2 . This reporting of the employer paid amount for health insurance is for `` informational '' purposes only and is not being added to the employee 's gross income for income tax purposes . There are some skeptics who see this as a precursor to the eventual tax treatment of employer paid health insurance as employee income at some future date but at this time there is nothing in the Affordable Care Act or any pending legislation that would do this . Where this reporting of employer paid health insurance will become a tax issue will be in 2018 when the `` Cadillac Tax '' portion of the health care law goes into effect . The Cadillac Tax will be a 40 % excise tax imposed on health insurance plans whose annual premium costs exceed $ 10,200 for an individual or $ 27,500 for family coverage -LRB- these amounts will be indexed for inflation -RRB- . So , an employer in 2018 who finds themselves with health plan premium levels exceeding these amounts will be assessed a 40 % tax penalty . While such annual premium amounts may seem unreachable by many persons in 2014 . In some areas of the country , and especially with some very rich collectively bargained plans , total costs are already coming close to these trigger points . When one observes the increases in group health insurance plan costs already triggered by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act in 2014 and applies projected inflationary trend increases over the next few years it becomes much easier to estimate that a larger portion of employer based plans could find themselves subject to this tax penalty . This is one of the underlying motivations for more employers to move to high deductible health insurance plans in order to reduce their premium costs .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
YES , in the aggregate sense . Perhaps for some individuals or groups their particular situation will allow them to benefit from the changes in rating methods and benefits required by the Affordable Care Act . But for most individuals and groups I am entirely comfortable in predicting higher health insurance costs . First of all , the underlying cost of health care services continues to rise . As these costs rise the cost of insuring these services must rise accordingly , this has been the case throughout my 30 years in the health insurance industry . Secondly , we are beginning to get a picture of what the enrollment composition in the individual health insurance marketplaces is looking like . As predicted by many industry professionals , the enrollment is skewing towards an older and sicker population with the highly desired young and healthy population largely remaining on the sidelines . Just today one of nation 's largest pharmacy management companies reported their preliminary analysis of the prescription utilization of marketplace enrollees vs their pre-health care reform population . Usage of expensive prescription medications for serious chronic health problems is 47 % higher , and this is just based on a couple of months of utilization data ! While some hold out the hope that the people who waited until the last moment to enroll were disproportionately young and healthy , my own experience enrolling people gives little indication that this was the case . So , the table has been set for adverse selection -LRB- more sick than healthy enrollees -RRB- in the health insurance pool , especially for the insurance carriers who elected to participate in the government health insurance marketplaces . This can not help but translate into higher health insurance costs for 2015 and in many areas of the country this will translate into very significant double digit increases in individual and small group health insurance . This has already been broadly hinted at by all the major health insurance carriers , it 's really not a question of `` if '' but just `` how much '' .
Job loss is always a unsettling period in our lives and having to address your health insurance concerns only compounds things . The first thing you should look into is the feasibility of continuing your coverage through your former employer 's health plan under either your state 's continuation of coverage provisions or , if your employer has 20 + employees , under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . Unless you were terminated with cause your former employer should have provided you with information regarding your rights in this area . If you have a spouse who is employed and has health insurance coverage available through their employer this is a qualifying event for you to be added as a dependent on your spouse 's plan or for you and your spouse to both enroll in the spouse 's employer 's health plan if you had both been enrolled under your former employer 's health plan . If your spouse has access to coverage through their employer this will almost certainly make you ineligible for subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Some people , especially those with family coverage , may find paying the entire premium for the former employer 's health plan to be cost prohibitive or may not want to continue be covered under it for other reasons . Losing coverage from an employer 's group health plan is a `` Qualifying Event '' that grants you a `` Special Election Period '' under the Affordable Care Act . You have a 60-day window after losing coverage to purchase individual health insurance either directly from an insurance carrier or through the state or Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in your state . The only good reason to purchase your coverage through a government health insurance marketplace is if your income level for 2015 would qualify you for a premium subsidy and possibly for cost sharing reductions . Currently a person 's qualification for these subsidies is based upon the applicant 's projected FAMILY income for all of 2015 . So , your situation is not an uncomplicated one . SEEK OUT AN EXPERIENCED HEALTH INSURANCE BROKER WHO REPRESENTS MULTIPLE INSURANCE CARRIERS AND WHO IS LICENSED TO SELL COVERAGE IN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE FOR GUIDANCE ON THESE MATTERS . If you are in good health and pre-existing condition coverage is not a concern for you , then in the event that the options I 've listed above do n't fit your financial needs , you can consider Short Term Major Medical insurance coverage as bridge coverage if you anticipate getting another job in the weeks or months ahead . These policies are usually less expensive -LRB- sometimes significantly so -RRB- than the options discussed above and can provide protection from financial ruin in the event an illness or injury occurs while the Short Term Medical policy is in effect . PLEASE NOTE : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty so there could be tax ramifications if you are covered under such a policy for more than 90-days . This does not mean that a Short Term Medical policy is an option you should not consider but it is an option that you should choose only with a full understanding of the positives and negatives associated with this choice . Which is another reason you should seek the guidance of an experienced Health Insurance Broker .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
An affidavit of spousal health insurance is a legal document that may be required by an employer or governmental health plan -LRB- such as a state 's Children 's Health Insurance Plan or CHIP -RRB- that documents if the employee or applicant 's spouse is employed and if they are eligible for or covered by their employer 's group health insurance plan . This form will be used to determine if the spouse is eligible for enrollment or determine that their employer 's plan will pay in a primary capacity -LRB- pays the claim first -RRB- and the other employer 's plan or the government based health plan will pay in a secondary capacity -LRB- paying on any unpaid balance after the primary insurance carrier has paid on a claim -RRB- . Expect to see these types of forms in your workplace or if you or a family member are accessing public health insurance programs . Increasing numbers of employers , both private sector and public sector , are making efforts to move dependent spouses who have access to health insurance elsewhere off of their plans and onto the spouse 's employer 's plan . Increasingly an additional premium penalty is being applied to employees who insist on covering a spouse who has coverage available through another employer or source . And , in the more extreme circumstances some employers are declining to cover spouses at all . These actions are a result of the increasing costs of health care that employers and governmental agencies are experiencing and to a quirk in the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- that does not define a spouse as a dependent . Unfortunately , this is what happens when politician 's pass a law without reading it as was the case with the 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act .
There are multiple ways to get health insurance for you and your family and , depending on where you live , a wide array of options for health insurance coverage types and cost points . With the implementation of the ObamaCare requirements individual health insurance plans and costs have been transformed dramatically and the consumer needs to exercise great care in making their health plan selection . My first and best recommendation is to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is certified to sell health insurance coverage both on and off of the government health insurance marketplace in your state of residence . There can be much more involved in a health insurance plan than what a bullet points overview of the plan 's benefits are and its monthly premium . A knowledgeable health insurance agent can explain if a given plan covers you if you go outside its network , if it has a broad or a narrow pharmacy network , if the plan 's medical deductible applies per person covered or is aggregated for the family , and a whole lot of other things you should know before making your purchasing decision . Under ObamaCare if you purchase a health insurance plan you later learn you do n't like it 's not just a simple matter of cancelling your coverage and enrolling with another insurance carrier . So , buyer beware . If you and your family have income levels below 100 % or 138 % -LRB- depending upon the state you live in -RRB- of the Federal Poverty Level then you will qualify for coverage under your state 's Medicaid plan . In that event you need to contact your state government 's Medicaid office . Of course , there is the HealthCare.gov web site that you can go to and shop for coverage and enroll online . Quite frankly , while HealthCare.gov has improved somewhat over last year 's rocky start , I find most consumers still have a hard time truly understanding the information as it is presented on HealthCare.gov and they still need a knowledgeable person to explain the differences between various plan offerings and how to approach the subsidy process . Also , there are other online sites available , some with telephonic support to help answer a person 's questions . This can be kind of crap shoot though as you may or may not be talking to someone who understands the details of your particular location 's health plan options and they are n't doing much more than reading you a summary off of their own computer screen . So , remember , health insurance is still a very local product and varies from state to state and even within different areas within a state . You will be best served to deal with someone who is more locally based in most cases .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Medical care has a price . In the open market it is fixed by consumers who want a service and medical personnel who can deliver the service . The problem occurs when someone needs the treatment but can not or will not pay the price for the service . I say , Will not because every decision about spending is discretionary . Should society as a whole bear the responsibility for the medical care for every resident ? Should the nature of that care be regulated ? Should the source of funding be general ? Those are the most pressing questions when considering a universal health care system . Ultimately in a universal health care system there is a specified list of services and a funding mechanism that is not based upon need for medical services . You may need a procedure that isnt covered in the program . At the same time you might consider another procedure immoral or frivolous . Who is going to decide ? The idea of universal health care sounds very good until you understand that some medical services will probably not be covered . In the USSR dental hygiene consisted of inserting a fluorescent tube into the patients mouth and surgery was routinely conducted in a super-cold environment because anesthesia was not readily available . In that case , most Americans would consider the health care to be inadequate . However , it was available to all and at little or no direct cost to the consumer . Under most regimes universal health care becomes rationed health care . The best example is the army under war time conditions . It is called triage but it means that you treat those with the greatest likelihood of recovery before treating soldiers with graver injuries . While it might be the best utilization of manpower , the soldier with his leg blown off , might not like the wait and a narcotic shot is not going to make his family happy . The issue of who is going to pay for the universal health care system is the most sensitive . No one wants to see others in need . By the same token no one wants to pay the high bill for medical treatment . If the universal care is funded by general funds from taxes it will always be a political football . If it is paid by premiums paid by individuals there will always be a need to assist those unable to pay the premium . The problem really boils down to our expectations of treatment level , the availability and cost of that treatment and who is going to pay the price . Yes , it sounds like a great idea but it has many difficulties and when it is expected then the society will start to question the need for universal flat screen TVs , micro-wave ovens and wall-to-wall carpets . There really isnt an end unless you look at the Soviet Union and see how it ended .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Will My Health Insurance Work In Europe ?
Excellent question ! You should check the basic terms of coverage in your health insurance policy and a call to customer service might not be a bad idea . As with everything else in health insurance these days , things are changing rapidly . It comes as a surprise to many people that their individual or group health insurance may not provide coverage outside of the United States . Internal policies vary between health insurance carriers and they could even vary depending upon your employer and whether they have designed such coverage into their group health plan . You would be safest to start out with the assumption that you are not covered and that you would want to purchase a specialty policy to cover you during the term of visit outside of the UnitedStates . The length and purpose of your stay may also have a bearing on your coverage . Going to Bermuda for two weeks on vacation may be viewed far differently than going on a 6-month mission to Nigeria for example . An insurance broker or travel agent should be able to tell you more about these policies .
US auto insurance does not cover you for driving a vehicle in Europe . It 's US insurance and will only cover you in the United States , Canada and US Territories . . US insurance has no jurisdiction in Europe and is unable to defend or bring suit in a court case . If you travel to Europe and rent a vehicle for example you will need to purchase temporary insurance if made available .
United States Auto insurance onlycoversthe United States , it 's territories and Canada . In order to operate a vehicle in Europe you would have to purchase coverage there as Europe does not recognize US insurance . Also the US insurance carriers have no recourse in the event of a law suit in a country outside their jurisdiction . Man US insurance carriers do cover you into Mexico but I recommend if entering Mexico you purchase Mexican Insurance as it is illegal in Mexico to drive without Mexican Insurance .
Group 16 is a classification of vehicles -LRB- mostly used in Europe -RRB- that are used to distinguish risk from other groups . For example , a Fiat 500 C and a Ford Fiesta are typically found in that group . If you live here in the US and will not be visiting Europe , it will not impact you .
Most U.S. insurance companies do not do business in Europe . There are some that do . Check with your agent . You will probably find that your current coverage extends from the USA into Canada and along a strip of the Mexican border . There are many insurance companies that will be glad to help you find coverage in Europe . Enjoy the scenery and dont forget that the rules of the road are a bit different .
This debate has been going on for the last century . In theory , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having health insurance ? And , in theory , if everyone was in the insurance risk pool this would be the best way to spread health care costs equally . By the same token , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having good and ample food & water , and everyone needs housing , and everyone needs utilities for their housing , and everyone needs transportation and there is a long list of other needs that we all have . The real question is can a society afford universal health insurance and thus universal health care in the sense that most Americans have become accustomed to getting it ? When you start looking at the economics of health care this becomes much more problematic . Health care is different from most services we consume in that it creates its own growing demand . Who does n't want to live longer , and live healthier during that longer life ? And , as you have probably noticed , we have a continually growing list of parts we can replace , once deadly illnesses we can now manage or cure , and treatments that just improve your `` quality of life '' . All this comes with a price tag and the price just keeps going up . I was born in 1957 for a cost of $ 400 , my son was born in 1987 for a cost of $ 4000 , and today a normal childbirth is easily $ 8000 + . As best as I can tell , babies are born the same way today as they were in 1957 but the cost has far outpaced general inflation levels in the economy as a whole over that time period . The painful reality is that providing universal healthcare in a modern society -LRB- e , g , - North America , Europe -RRB- has not been accomplished without rationing of healthcare services -LRB- however it might be disguised -RRB- . For instance , we have more MRI scanners in Memphis , TN than in all of Canada -LRB- a nation often cited as an example of where universal health insurance is a success -RRB- . Tests that get ordered and conducted on the same day here can have waiting times of months up there . There really is no definitive answer to your question . But it does highlight the gap between theory and reality when trying to address providing health insurance to a population .
There is no uniform health insurance system in Europe , each nation has it 's own system . On the whole , European nations have taken a more socialized approach to financing health care than we have in the United States -LRB- though ObamaCare is kind of changing that -RRB- . In Switzerland you are mandated to purchase private health insurance . In Britain they have the National Health Service that provides health insurance for the masses while at the same time having a growing private health insurance and health care delivery system for the people who can afford to operate outside of the national system -LRB- the class system remains alive and well in England and many European nations -RRB- . Some European systems give the illusion of being `` free '' but people are really paying for their care in the form of higher taxes and rationing of care along with price controls on healthcare providers . While there are things we Americans can learn from the European experience , the Europeans have hardly achieved perfection when it comes to health care and health insurance .
Yours is an excellent question as many people do not realize that many group and individual health insurance policies do not cover them outside of the USA . There are specialized policies available to cover you when you are travelling outside the country . You should contact an insurance agent to explain your needs and to assist you in finding the policy best suited to your needs . Taking a cruise or travelling through Europe for a few weeks can be an entirely different situation than perhaps planning to be away for months or perhaps years on an overseas contracting assignment or religious or charitable mission trip . Also , your place of destination may be an important factor , working in Switzerland for a year is a totally different situation than volunteering to go to Syria or Afghanistan . If you need help with this need please feel free to contact me .
`` Non-Life Insurance '' , or `` General Insurance '' , in Europe is the equivalent of `` Property and Casualty Insurance '' in the United States and Canada . It is insurance that covers loss from a particular financial event . It does not cover a person 's life , as life insurance does . Therefore , it is called `` non-life '' insurance .
I presume that you are not eligible for Medicare for some reason . You might investigate individual health insurance though with the open enrollment season having concluded on February 15th you would have to have a `` Change of Life Status '' event occur or qualify under the provisions of the upcoming special election period beginning March 15th -LRB- this is for people who were uninsured in 2014 and have just figured out they are going to have to pay the individual mandate tax penalty and that they would be subject to the individual tax mandate penalty for the 2015 tax year -RRB- . If you were to qualify you would have to be prepared to pay a pretty high monthly premium . If you have a business or have a spouse that has a business and some employees you might consider a group health plan . I recently wrote a small group where a man about your age had emigrated from Europe because he had married an American lady about 20 years younger than him and they had a small business with a couple of other employees . that man is now covered as his spouse 's dependent under their small group plan .
Axa home insurance , I believe , is available in Great Britain . It appears to be a reputable company but I am not familiar with companies in Europe . While it is true that I have a great British accent , which is popular at gatherings with folks from England , I am tot well-versed regarding their insurers .
That is a great question ! There were some types of travelers insurances offered in the 1840 's that covered you if your train crashed or steamboat sank , but other than that , there really was n't much until the late 1800 's when disability policies became popular . Britain passed a law in the early 1900 's that created a `` National Health Insurance '' , and most of Europe kind of adopted similar laws , but we did n't catch on until 1929 when us Texans -LRB- Baylor University Hospital , and some local teachers , I think -RRB- created a system of standardized costs for hospital stays . Shortly thereafter came Blue Cross/Blue Shield , and then all kinds of competing companies . The history of insurance is interesting stuff . Thanks for asking !
A terminal bonus -LRB- or capital bonus , or final bonus -RRB- can be paid upon maturity of a mutual policy . This is a feature of some `` with-profit '' Whole Life policies in Europe and Canada and other countries in the Commonwealth of Nations . It is comparable to a final dividend in the US .
Critical illness insurance is a relatively new product in the US . Originating in South Africa and Europe , critical illness customarily pays a lump sum cash benefit on first diagnosis for as many as 20 or so `` dread diseases '' . More broad in scope than just a cancer plan , critical illness is something everyone should consider .
Direct Line is handed in Europe and morespecifically , Great Britain . Here in the United States , there are many major car insurance companies that offer affordable coverage . You can easily shop and compare different rates through experienced brokers . Just like the famous saying says ... We shop and you save ! And it 's true !
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , I ca n't give you a very positive answer . I do not know of a single US auto insurer that will extend coverage to you overseas . I know that if you were asking about Canada , or even Mexico , that I could give you a better answer , but not for Europe , I 'm afraid . Sorry , and thanks for asking !
Car insurance groups -LRB- this terminology is used mostly in parts of Europe -RRB- vehicles according to their risk . Although we do the same thing here in the US , we tend to use different descriptions for the classifications . A broker that is experienced in these types of groupings can tell you where your vehicle should be placed .
Your insurance policy purchased in the United States will only cover rental car coverage in the United States , Canada , and it 's territories which would include Puerto Rico and Guam . Other countries do not recognize USinsurancein this particular situation and US based companies are not able to bring suit or defend out of US jurisdiction . You will need to purchase the insurance offered to you at the time of renting a car in Europe .
I am assuming you are referring to renting a vehicle in Europe and your US coverage extending to the rental car . This totally depends on your carrier and their policy . Most likely NO , some -LRB- though not all -RRB- US carriers will extend coverage to Canada -LRB- many used to extend to Mexico as well , but more and more are removing this coverage -RRB- . There may be a few carriers out there that would extend to European Countries , but the only way to know for sure is to call them or you agent directly and ask . I 'd get it in writing too ... .
Global Index Universal Life Insurance is IUL that offers interest crediting based on an equity index strategy option that includes foreign stock market indexes in addition to US stock marked indexes . Non US indexes commonly used are the EuroSTOXX 50 Index -LRB- Western Europe -RRB- and the Hang Seng Index -LRB- Hong Kong -RRB- . Depending on the Global Index Universal Life product , it usually offers the choices of a fixed interest strategy , an indexed strategy , or a combination of the two . The features of IUL that attracts consumers is the potential to accumulate higher than normal cash values through their ability to take advantage of the upside potential of the market . Yet there is a 0 % floor that helps protect them against downside risks .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Bury Someone With No Life Insurance ?
It is a challenge to come up with the money to bury someone who does not have life insurance or cash saved up for that event . Even with good intentions , savings can become depleted , putting family and friends in a difficult position . Most of the clients we 've had who have been involved in that type of situation , said they have taken up a collection among the family to bury their deceased relative . However , there are a few sources where you can help supplement funeral and burial costs . Social Security will pay a lump sum of $ 255 for a funeral if the deceased person qualified for SS benefits . Veterans can be buried for free in one of the nation 's 131 national cemeteries , and there are burial funds available for some eligible veterans . Read the criteria for receiving these benefits here : h WEBSITELINK Funeral homes like to be paid quickly , but you could reimburse those who donated after holding a sale of the deceased person 's belongings . Or perhaps memorials given could be applied toward the burial costs . Keep in mind that you can take out a policy on a parent , grandparent or other person for whom the costs of burial might fall on your shoulders . They just have to agree to and sign the policy . Perhaps if they understand the hardship being uninsured can put on their loved ones , they might consent to taking this step .
It is a challenge to come up with the money to bury someone who does not have life insurance or cash saved up for that event . Even with good intentions , savings can become depleted , putting family and friends in a difficult position . Most of the clients we 've had who have been involved in that type of situation , said they have taken up a collection among the family to bury their deceased relative . However , there are a few sources where you can help supplement funeral and burial costs . Social Security will pay a lump sum of $ 255 for a funeral if the deceased person qualified for SS benefits . Veterans can be buried for free in one of the nation 's 131 national cemeteries , and there are burial funds available for some eligible veterans . Read the criteria for receiving these benefits here : h WEBSITELINK Funeral homes like to be paid quickly , but you could reimburse those who donated after holding a sale of the deceased person 's belongings . Or perhaps memorials given could be applied toward the burial costs . Keep in mind that you can take out a policy on a parent , grandparent or other person for whom the costs of burial might fall on your shoulders . They just have to agree to and sign the policy . Perhaps if they understand the hardship being uninsured can put on their loved ones , they might consent to taking this step .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
Unfortunately , the statistics show that most dont have enough life insurance and many dont have any . The issue is love . If you love someone , you wont neglect making provision for them if you arent there . In our city , people on the street corner begging for money to bury a loved one is an all too frequent occurrence . A few dollars a day set aside by that loved one would have taken care of those expenses .
If you love someone you need life insurance . Do you want your loved one to be forced to try to come up with money to pay the high cost of funeral and final expenses in a time of grief ? Can your spouse or loved ones afford to pay the debt you leave behind ? Do you want your spouse and children to be able to continue to live in the home you worked hard to provide ? If you have no debt , no wife or kids and no loved ones you still must be buried or cremated . You should at least have enough insurance or funds set aside for that !
There are many factors that go into the rating of your policy . One of those is the base rate your insurance company files with the state . Everything is calculated off the base rate and insurance companies usually adjust their rates at least once per year . There will be a rate effective date buried somewhere within your policy but you may not see it easily . They will adjust their rates based on their experience for the last year and they can go up or down depending on how the claims have been . You 'll also see the coverage A -LRB- dwelling -RRB- get adjusted every year . As construction costs change , so will the coverage on your home -LRB- just a hint , they usually do n't go down -RRB- . Then there are a few other factors that may affect your rates : insurance score , claims , changes in coverage or deductibles . They all go into the rating calculation . Do yourself a favor and read your renewal -LRB- you 'd be surprised how many people do n't -RRB- . You 'll be able to track what 's happening and look for anything that might not be right . If you have a question , talk to your agent . He/she should be happy to go through it with you .
Term Life Insurance is not the best type of life insurance for every situation . We get regular calls from people who thought they would only need life insurance for a temporary period of time . However , now they are thinking ahead to their final years , and worried about where the money will come from to bury them . If the need is not permanent , however , Term Life Insurance is best for its relatively low price tag .
Covering a new born baby for most people does not seem natural . However , the truth is some times bad things happen and a baby can die for a number of reasons . Most people think there should be enough benefit to cover a funeral cost . But what about the emotional cost to Mom and Dad and the siblings ? We are not built to bury our children at any age , life insurance benefits allow time to grieve without financial worry . On most adult policies have a child rider that can be added for just a few dollars and will cover all of your children with guaranteed conversion as a young adult to protect their insurability . Certainly a cash value plan , like whole life insurance , as above mentioned several times is an option as well for a few more dollars . None of us know how long we have on this earth , life insurance helps the financial side of grief of your loved ones regardless of the person 's age .
In what way do you mean ? As a college funding choice , possibly , but it would require significant investment that might be better spent on the parents to insure college . A life insurance policy on a child is a good idea for several reasons . Set up properly it is a financial cornerstone to a sound financial portfolio beginning for a child as they grow into adulthood . Imagine locking in a price that is extremely low and having it gain in value over the years into adulthood . Add the option of guaranteed insurability to the plan and you 've taken away the ability for an insurance company to say `` no '' to your child in the future . That is extremely valuable . Now , let 's look at the sad side of insurance on a child . What if you need it ? As heartbreaking as it would be to lose a child , imagine having to figure out what you can `` afford '' for a service or headstone ? Imagine how much time you 'll need off of work and what your employer would cover salary wise ? For the same reason I purchased insurance as a young single man , long before I went into this business , I did n't want a double or triple whammy for my parents who would already be dealing with my death . Throw lost wages in there and having to find the money to bury me and I 've created devastation in my household . While may God forbid , if you were to lose a child , is n't that enough ?
Why should you buy life insurance ? Maybe you should n't . If no one depends on you for income , if you will have no final expenses to bury or cremate you , if you do n't care about the person that might be stuck paying off your debt , then , do n't buy life insurance . Also , people that do not believe in insurance should n't buy it . In spite of the fact that owning an insurance policy is not a religious commitment , buying it might disrupt their value system and enrich an already wealthy insurance agent or insurance company . On the other hand , if you do care about anything other than yourself at all , you should consider buying it . Even a small face amount of life insurance is better than having none . It might provide you with some peace of mind as the gurney you are bleeding to death on is being rolled into the surgical unit .
There is three reasons to insure a child with permanent life insurance . First , the reason no one likes to think about , but a child 's death is devastating on all levels , but is a possibility . Not having the money to bury a child just adds extra hardship during an extremely difficult time . Second reason is to protect the child 's insurability . Once the child has a life insurance policy , they can in most cases increase face amounts without proof of underwriting . This is crucial to a child diagnosed with type I diabetes , cancer or even worse . The third and final reason to insure a child with life insurance is the cash value . Not only can you use the policy as a teaching moment for the child to learn to save but the many uses as the child grows into an adult . Cash value from a life insurance policy can be used for emergencies , hardships , as well as college , a down payment on a first house or even retirement . Child life insurance is so affordable and important , every parent should strongly consider it for their children .
A policies end is determined by the policy it is , term or whole life . Term insurance comes in 10,15,20 , or 30 year level term and can be renewable for the same amount at the end of the term period . While whole life is , as it states , for a person 's whole life . The problem though with whole life insurance is that it is much , much more expensive than term thus , making it unaffordable to carry the correct amount of insurance that a family needs . Because a family needs the most protection in the early years when their debts are the highest , children still at home , there is still mortgage , and income replacement is needed the only way to accomplish this is through term life insurance . As time goes on when debts are eliminated , mortgage paid , and retirement income is needed the need for life insurance is eliminated or at least lessened to the point of the need of a burial policy only . As assets increase along with retirement savings your family will have enough to live on and certainly enough to bury you . The key is proper planning .
A child is not an economic unit . Quite the opposite , however , the loss of a child can have a financial impact on the family . This is rarely the motivation for the purchase of life insurance on a child but if you drive the city streets often you will see people asking for donations to help bury a child . It is sad but it does happen . Most people who purchase life insurance on a child are trying to secure coverage for a lifetime at an early age in order to set a very low premium for the coverage and to avoid the possibility that the child might become uninsurable in the future . My brother became uninsurable at about age 22 . This is an issue that concerns many . Life insurance plans are often seen as savings vehicles to accumulate money for future requirements . It is probably not the best way to save money for a college education but it does provide a systematic way to set aside money and for that money to grow free of current taxation . The life insurance policies available to children often have a rider that allows the child to purchase additional life insurance at specific times in the future without proving evidence of insurability . This can be extremely important .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Without analyzing a persons full situation , it is near impossible to make a recommendation . Most anyone requires some sort of life insurance , even if it 's just enough to bury the deceased . The idea is to pay less for getting a larger return of cash when needed . By leveraging your dollars over a long period of time , it can help pay for final expenses . If a person needs more cash on hand for estate purposes , there is no cheaper way to pay for the benefit needed than life insurance , if in proper health .
This is a great question . The amount of insurance that a person needs is completely up to them . I have clients that want a low amount of coverage just to assure that they are buried properly and then I have clients that want half a million or more to assure that the house and cars are paid off and that the children are taken care of in the event of their death .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- dependent children are allowed to stay on their parent 's health insurance coverage until age 26 . This is without regard to the whether the dependent child is or is not a full-time student , is married , or has coverage available through their own employer . So , in the vast majority of situations a dependent child can not be kicked off their parents coverage until they turn 26 . I say the vast majority of cases because in typical fashion there are these odd quirks in the law that no one read before they passed it . One of those odd quirks applies to what are called `` grandfathered '' health plans -LRB- policies that were in effect prior to the March 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act . Buried in the fine print is a provision that became applicable on January 1 , 2014 . Under this provision , if the adult dependent child does have health insurance available to them through their employer then they can be dropped from their parent 's coverage . As such , whether your parent 's individual or group health insurance plan qualifies as a `` grandfathered '' policy can be a crucial factor in determining the adult dependent 's eligibility for continued coverage .
In the vast majority of situations the answer is no . Medicaid is a state-run insurance program designed to help low income persons pay for their health care . As a general rule you must not be able to afford to pay for private health insurance in order to qualify for Medicaid . However , this is a government program we 're talking about so there are always some exceptions buried in the fine print . This is where things can get complicated and the rules can vary from state to state in some situations . Some state Medicaid programs will assist in paying private insurance premiums for a person who can not fully pay them . A low income person who has recently lost their job and their health insurance through their former job may be eligible for assistance in paying their COBRA premiums in some states . You would have to check with your state 's Medicaid office to learn what the rules are in your particular state . Also , you have a limited amount of time to apply for such assistance after losing your job in states that provide this type of assistance so time is of the essence . Medicaid also has a special program for people diagnosed with AIDS that may qualify them for premium payment assistance . Once again , you will need to check with your state 's Medicaid office to determine what their policies and procedures are for qualifying for such assistance .
That is a great question ! There are a couple of good reasons , one that is nicer to think about than the other , but both valid . The nicer one is that the cost of life insurance is a set price for whole life insurance . That means that if you purchase a policy for let us say , $ 5 a month for your child , they will still be paying $ 5 a month when they are 25 . The price never changes , despite whatever health issues arise . The other reason is that it is unfortunate but true that children die also . And their funerals are expensive also . If it would be a hardship for you to be able to bury your child , then that $ 5 a month is a really good hedge . Another reason is the one I alluded to above - if there is a health issue that surfaces that could impact significantly your child 's health throughout their life , then getting the affordable coverage before the issue arises is a huge blessing . Many companies have been forced by the slowed economy to increase premiums on policies for the less healthy , and to cut back on what they will accept as healthy . It 's a possibility that you may never have to worry about this -LRB- God willing , and I sincerely hope so -RRB- , but if there are health issues in your family lines , it might be a good thing to consider . You would want to look for a good independent agent in your area to look for the right policy for you . If you would like more information , please feel free to contact me , and we 'll go over your questions offline . I appreciate your asking , and if you do have a newborn , congrats !!
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Your Insurance Cover A Car You Just Bought ?
This will depend on if it is an additional vehicle or a replacement vehicle and how your policy treats replacement and/or additional vehicles . Only a reading of your policy can provide you with the specifics . Some policies automatically extend liability coverages to additional vehicles for a specified period of time . Some policies may provide physical damage coverage for a limited time.There is really no way to tell without referring to your contract of insurance . A competent knowledgeable agent or broker should be able to do this for you .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
If you bought just liability coverage it will not pay if your car is stolen . It just depends what you selected when you bought your coverage . All states require at least a minimum amount of liability coverage before you can legally drive a car . You do not have to have insurance coverage that will pay to repair or replace your own car but you do have to protect other people 's property that you might damage with your auto .
Whole life insurance is for a very special kind of person . First of all , you are someone who sees the need for life insurance protection on a lifelong basis . Not just to cover the mortgage , not just to protect your family , not just as a supplement for your retirement . You face the fact that as life goes on , your need for life insurance changes , but for many people , the need is always there . And it could be for you . You know that if you bought term insurance , odds are you 'd end up buying another policy anyway , after that one renews . At a higher price . And hopefully youre insurable . Might as well lock in to guaranteed rates on a permanent basis . This brings up the second point . You are a guarantee-oriented type of person . You realize that life insurance is the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it has to be strong . Reliable . You do n't want too many variables in this product because , if you have a shaky foundation , your whole portfolio could crumble . Therefore , you want a guarantee on the premium , and you want a guarantee on the death benefit . You are also someone who appreciates the added benefit of cash value inside whole life insurance . For many people , whole life insurance is the guaranteed portion of their asset portfolio . No other product gives better guarantees -LRB- go ahead and check out the interest rates on guaranteed products out there . Then compare them to the guarantees whole life gives you . -RRB- On top of that , with a top-flight company , the dividends - the non-guaranteed portion of the cash build up - can be pretty rich . With a little strategic thinking , those dividends can enhance the value of that product . They can be used to offset the cost . They can be used to enhance the survivor benefit . They can be used to put cash in your pocket . They can be used to offset the cost of another policy . Lastly , whole life insurance is for disciplined people . In order to receive all the benefits named above , you need to stick to the payment schedule . It 's a fixed-premium product and will not tolerate underfunding , or over funding , or skipping payments . If you realize the bang for the buck you can get with whole life insurance , and have the discipline to stick to a premium payment schedule , then you 'll be glad you bought this policy .
Believe it or not , there are some people out there who are very happy they bought whole life insurance :-RRB- . I can think of two in particular . These fellows are both in their late 50s . They have been in business together for over 30 years . As a matter of fact , they grew up together . They run a very successful catering business . They each bought a whole life policy when they were first starting out in their career . They each had just gotten married , and were intent on starting a family and growing a thriving business together . The each qualified for one of the best underwriting classes , and were prepared to make a commitment to keep paying the premium . They each chose a blue-chip company with a history of paying big dividends consistently . Now fast forward 30 years . As you might imagine , there is a ton of money inside those policies . And it keeps growing . The guaranteed interest rate is better than anything else you can find . The size of the dividends are also extremely competitive for a conservative product . They each were smart in managing their money . They have other funds available for emergencies , for growing their business , for recreation , etc. . So they can just let their insurance account value grow and grow . When the time is right , they can draw down a pretty significant cash flow . And you know what ? If worked out correctly , they wont have to pay a dime of taxes on that money ! If they do have an emergency , then the cash in that account can be available within days . No credit check , no hassle . Again , with the proper guidance , they can avoid taxation and still secure the survivor benefit needed . In the case of these two successful gentlemen , whole life worked out just fine .
The first penalty is that you more than likely would not be able to register your car for use on public roads . Most States require car insurance in order to do that . If you had car insurance but let it lapse , or cancel it , the Insurance Company in many states like Connecticut , will notify the Department of Motor Vechicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- . They will contact you and require you to show proof of coverage . If you can not , they will suspend your registration andit will be illigal to drive your car -LRB- s -RRB- . If you do drive and are stopped by a police officer , along with the charge for which you have been stopped , you will also be found to be driving an unregistered and uninsured car which will add to the size of your fine . In many cases the car will be towed and impounded and you will have to find another means of transportation back home , for which you may have to pay . You may also be required to appear in court . Once that is behind you , in order to get your car back , you will have to show proof that you have bought insurance again . It will be more expensive now because of the violations and the fact that you have not had continuous coverage . You will also have to pay to have the car releassed from the impound facility . You will have lost considerable time from work for all of this meaning that on top of having to shell out more money , you will have lost pay . Bottom line ... do n't drive without insurance .
You can drive a car home you just bought that has no insurance . But you should n't . In fact , the dealership typically will verify that you are covered . However , if you are adding or replacing a vehicle on a policy in good standing , you may be covered anyway when you drive the new car home .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Great question ! Many years ago I purchased a policy at a dealership in Maryland so that I could drive the car I 'd just bought home . Some dealerships will have an agent that works there , -LRB- usually in the financing department -RRB- but often it is cheaper for you to call your agent , and have the new car added to your policy and emailed or faxed to the dealership while you wait . It can save you a few bucks , and a lot over the long run - like a gas station near the rental car return , they know if you need it , they can charge more , you will spend it . Thanks for asking !
The answer depends on what you bought . Term is bought for a specific number of years , unlike whole life , which is for your lifetime . So long as you pay the premium , term will not expire until you reach the end of the period you bought it for . For example , ten year term expires ten years after you buy it , so long as you pay the premiums . If you do not replace term before it expires , either with more term , or with whole life , you will be left with no life insurance . Thank you . GARY LANE
All great answers above ... . Yup ... the `` what , when , where , etc. '' is the key . ALSO ... how much coverage are you trying to buy ?? There are many `` guarantee issue '' plans out there -LRB- depending on age -RRB- . Some are instant coverage while others have a `` ramp up '' period before you get full coverage . `` Might be '' an option ... yet we don ; t know enough ab out you -LRB- age , sex , other history -RRB- . I once placed 5 policies in force for one dude ... he needed a specific amount for his divorce . The judge did n't care about the cost because of the underwriting mess he created . So ... 5 policies . He 's now down to 2 policies 3 years later . When I played high school basket ball , Air Jordan 's first arrived . EVERY KID wanted them . Yet , even way back then , they were SOOOO expensive -LRB- like your life rate will be right now -RRB- . Did I say , `` Screw you Jordan '' & go and play barefoot ? NO ... I bought `` what i could '' -LRB- OK . Dad bought what he could -RRB- & I played . I was still a starter . I still won a trophy at the tournament . Just like with your car insurance , the more time that passes , the less you 're penalized for the DUI . Each year you can assess your situation for a `` better value '' . Suggestion ... Do what you can right NOW & let time fix the rate issue .
You do n't ever need to give up term life insurance , and should not do so unless you have given it a lot of thought . Term life insurance is the least expensive type of policy you can get , and most people have gotten the cheapest premium they will ever get on the policy they own right now . The exception to that might be if you had a health condition that has improved or cleared up since you bought your policy ; if you quit smoking over a year since you bought your policy ; if you lost a lot of weight and kept it off for at least a year since you bought your policy ; or if life insurance rates have dropped across the board . You also might find a new , lower rate with another comany , or by taking a shorter term . Visit with a good agent to see if any of these apply to you . If you want more or longer term , sometimes it is more cost efficient to take out a new policy in addition to the one you have . Sometimes it is better to combine both coverages into one new policy . Again , an ethical agent can help you determine what is best in your situation .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Buy whole life insurance when it hurts just a little bit . After a period of time that hurt will go away and you will be patting yourself on the back for your long sightedness . Dont think that you need all of your life insurance to be in a single policy . While there might be incremental savings in that approach it could lead to unnecessary and expensive delays . Senior citizens will tell you that they wished that they had bought more whole life and bought it earlier . They seldom say that they have too much insurance and would often like to purchase more but can not because of health and age .
Progressive does n't require a signed cancel request and you can access your policy right online and select cancel or call your agent . They are the Fastest when it comes to processing anything you should be able to immediately see the cancelation and if you have any refund . You also can call them direct at 1 800 progressive if you bought it online if you bought it from an agent you can call 1-800-876-5581 Bothe number should be able to assist you . They will tell you immediately if you have a refund coming or not .
To search for life insurance on a deceased person , start by looking through their financial records to see if you can find their policy , or any record that they bought a policy . If not , talk to relatives or friends who they may have told about purchasing a policy . Contact a local life insurance agency to see if a policy was bought there . If the deceased did business with one company , call that company to see if they have a record of the deceased person ever having bought a life insurance policy with them . If all else fails , you may have to wait a couple of years and see if it shows up as unclaimed property .
In my opinion , the best way to itemize all of your belongings for a Renters Insurance policy is to either take pictures of all items of significant value , along with a note describing when you bought the item , where , and at what price , or video tape your belongings and narrate when you bought them , where , and at what price . Then put the pictures or video on a USB Flash Drive and have someone hold it for you , do n't store it on the property that is insured . A safe deposit box , your friend or family member , or even your insurance agent themselves -LRB- I provide this service for my customers at no charge -RRB- are all good examples of who can hold this for you . From that point on , you only need to document any new items of significant value that you purchase , and remove any items you trade away or sell . -LRB- Do n't worry about recording every six pack of tube socks you buy , just the items that carry some value to them -RRB- . Of course , you can also write all this down on paper , but having visual evidence goes a long way in helping to determine what items were present when the policy was put in force , and what new items have been added . And , it 's always best to review your coverage every year with your insurance agent to make sure you are carrying the right amount of personal property coverage .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
Normally , the insured 's knowledge and consent is needed . But , today , there are a growing number of accidental death and no-exam policies in the marketplace in which a policy on another person can be bought online or by phone without the insured 's knowledge or consent , with or without fraud . I know because I 've been a murder trial witness in 3 cases over the past 4 years and it 's no fun . At our agency , all calls are recorded and all 3 charged were convicted in less than 4 hours ' time . But our phone agents were duped and did n't realize that they were not talking to the insured . Sadly , the total number of murders of a relative in order to gain life insurance proceeds is very common in the U.S. today and almost never talked about . Just Google `` life insurance murder '' and you will be shocked at what comes up on a daily basis . Three doctors in my family have reported for years that relatives who stand to gain insurance proceeds are often too anxious to `` unplug '' a loved one when a coma situation exists . Sad stuff . It 's safest for all concerned that the insured always have knowledge and consent to the life insurance being bought .
Once upon a time there was a very rich man . He owned a number of businesses which he had started himself and which he had built himself . Altogether , he employed close to 20,000 people . That means he created opportunities for 20,000 people to support their families and lead their own lives . He understood that he could never have built his business empire without the dedication , hard work , and loyalty of each and every one of those men and women . He took good care of them . He paid them well . Lots of bonuses , lots of benefits . He was very community-minded . He knew that no man , and no family , was an island unto itself . We need each other . We need each other in times of natural disasters , and human tragedy , and family distress . When people lose their job , or get sick , or maybe lose their home , they need a helping hand . He always made sure his hand was ready to give . He took it upon himself to help many , many people . He gave generously to community service organizations . He made sure that families who were suffering had the means to weather the storm and remain together . When people in need came to him , he helped them get back on to their own two feet . He was an extremely dedicated family man . He loved his wife dearly . He was always there for his children . Everything he did was really for them . He wanted them to have the best of everything . He especially wanted his son and daughter to have a great jump-start in life . His entire estate the houses , the businesses , the valuables - was going to go to them when he passed away . One day he had a lunch meeting with his friend who was an estate planning attorney . His friend made the following observation : You know , you are quite a person . You have done such a tremendous job building a life for yourself . All the people you employ , all the people you help . How fortunate your family is to have you as a provider . But heres the problem : God forbid you die tomorrow , this entire wonderful world you have built collapses . Without you and your broad shoulders , the entire enterprise stops in its tracks . You can imagine that our friend the Rich Man didnt like hearing that at all . He had indeed put so much of himself into what he held to be precious . It would almost be an act of betrayal for them to lose it all when he died . I mean , shouldnt he make provisions for their care after his death ? Why shouldnt the show go on ? So many people have become dependent on him . So , he bought a bunch of life insurance . Life insurance to make sure his family wouldnt have to sell half his assets just to pay the governments estate tax bill . They wouldnt have to sell the residences or family jewels . The heirlooms could stay in the family . He bought life insurance to enable his businesses to keep running . People would be able to keep their jobs . Vendors would get paid . Clients would receive service . The management team would have enough money to keep going and growing . He bought life insurance to fill the coffers of charities doing noble work in his community . Hungry people could get fed . Homeless people could get shelter . Unemployed people get retrained for new jobs . Life insurance made it possible for the great work this man had been doing to continue . And because life insurance is such a great deal financially , the cost of this planning was literally pennies on the dollar . Each dollar of life insurance benefit literally cost him a few cents . Of course , it was this financial wisdom and eagerness to take advantage of a great deal that made him rich in the first place :-RRB- Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Ice Damage ?
If your residence is damaged because of the weight of accumulated ice , snow or sleet , you can expect payment under most homeowners policies . That does not hold true for a swimming pool , as that is an excluded peril . As a homeowner you should do all you can to stop accumulated ice from damaging your home .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
If your residence is damaged because of the weight of accumulated ice , snow or sleet , you can expect payment under most homeowners policies . That does not hold true for a swimming pool , as that is an excluded peril . As a homeowner you should do all you can to stop accumulated ice from damaging your home .
There are circumstances where Homeowners Insurance may cover the damage caused by water leakage through a roof . It is best to check with your Insurance Professional , of course , about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . If the roof is compromised or damaged by a covered peril , say a severe windstorm for example , then if rain water leaks in and damages the interior of your home , you will probably have coverage . Likewise , and as was the case again this past winter in CT , if you have interior water damage that is caused by `` Ice damming '' which is a sever build up of ice forming at the lower edge of your roof , that then forces melted water up under your roofing material , there will also be coverage . These are only two examples , so again talk to your Insurance Professional .
Most HO-3 homeowners insurance policies will cover the damage from ice damning . Insurance inspectors are very knowledgeable about this type of damage and can tell the difference between lack of maintenance or pre-existing conditions and damage caused by ice damning . Always read your policy and contact your insurance professional before making a claim . Hope this helps
Water can be a major headache and also quite damaging to your property . In general , water damage that is weather related , oter than flood , is covered under a homeowners policy . Here in CT and throughout many northern states , we are unfortunately dealing with severe `` ice damming '' on residential and commercial property rooves . This causes water from melted ice to be forced up under roofing material which then can leak into the building . This causes some major damage to inside walls , flooring etc. . This type of loss is covered . Water that is suddenly dischargesd as a result of a burst pipe , for example is also usually covered . Talk to your insurance professional about your policy and ask about any specific coverage limitations .
I am assuming by ice dams you mean the ice buildup around gutters . If that is the case the answer would be no . That becomes amaintenanceissue . Your homeowners policy will cover roofcollapsedue to weight of ice and snow but the ice dams around the gutters generally would not be covered .
That is a great question ! If you are living in one of the Northern States where snowmobiles can see some use , it 's a good bet that you 'll be required to have some insurance coverage . There are a few really good reasons why it makes sense to get a policy . The first is that any damages or personal injuries that might occur on your property as a rule wo n't be covered by your homeowners policy . If something bad were to happen , you would be left unprotected for the liabilities of costs and damages . Your snowmobile -LRB- and trailer , if you have one -RRB- wo n't be covered under your auto policy either . So again , you would be liable for any damages if something bad were to happen . So what should you purchase ? I 'd strongly recommend the same kind of coverage that you 'd buy for your car - full coverage with comprehensive , collision , and liability . Here 's why - collision is obvious , if you run into something , or roll your sled , it will be covered by this part of the policy . The comprehensive portion covers the other stuff - hitting a deer , water damage busting thru ice , etc. . The liability part covers you for damage to riders , or property . You can add trailers to your policy coverage with some carriers , and that makes sense , as it 's cheap , and does n't get covered by most auto coverage . Sled policies are generally fairly inexpensive , and often can be discounted with multiple sleds , proof of training classes , and bundling with other policies . Most will not charge for non-use periods also . I 'd say it 's definitely something to have before you ever get on your sled , okay ? -LRB- I love this question , I 'm from up North originally myself , and do n't get to answer too many of these type questions here in Texas ! -RRB- Be safe , have fun , and thanks for asking !
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
No , homeowners insurance does not cover maintenance . If you have a covered loss the replacement of any damaged electrical components would be included but it will not pay for general electrical work . Covered loss would be things like fire , lightening , wind , hail , weight of ice and snow . Check with your agent if you feel your loss may be covered .
A general rule of thumb is that Homeowners ' Insurance Policy is not a maintenance agreement . So if you are asking if you can have your insurance pay to replace your roof due to age or wear and tear , the answer is going to be no . However , talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Discuss the covered perils as they relate to damage that your roof may have sustained . For example , wind , hail , weight of ice and snow are all usually covered perils in a Homeowners policy . Therefore , if your roof was damaged as a result of these or any other perils named in your policy , then you will find that there is coverage . The settlement will , of course , be subject to your property deductible .
It depends , which I know is an unsatisfactory answer . Assuming you have HO-3 Homeowners coverage there is protection against sudden rain/sleet/snow damage to your roof . In other words , if there is a sudden winter storm that persists for days on end , an ice dam builds up on your roof and causes damage there could be coverage . However , if you have an older roof and it has been through a few winter storms then the most likely answer you will get from an insurance company will be the damage was caused by normal wear and tear and the damage is not covered . So , depending upon the age of your roof , its pre-storm condition and the suddenness/severity of the storm you may or may not have coverage .
There are 3 policy forms for property insurance . Basic , Broad and Special . Basic will cover , Fire , Lightning , Windstorm or Hail , Explosion , Smoke , Vandalism , Aircraft or Vehicle Collision , Riot or Civil Commotion , Sinkhole Collapse , Volcanic Activity . Broad will cover all of Basic plus falling objects , weight of ice , sleet or snow , and accidental water damage . Special will cover everything that is not specifically excluded . If the policy does not exclude the coverage you are covered . Common exclusion are government action , nuclear hazard , war and military action , flood , fungus and pollution . Special Form gives you the broadest coverage 's . Now with special form you have a choice of an HO3 or an HO5 An HO3 is named perils for personal property and HO5 is open perils minus exclusion for personal property . While HO3 is the most common policy purchased the HO5 is the broadest coverage you can get in a homeowners policy .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
A HO-3 homeowners policy covers your driveway to an amount not to exceed the Coverage B limit . However , the insurance company generally does not pay for damage to a driveway caused by freezing , thawing or pressure or weight of ice or water whether driven by wind or not . Since the city is not responsible for the weather , I doubt that they would have any liability .
Great question ! The answer is most often yes , if your home has a sloped roof , and your particular policy provides for that coverage . If your roof is flat , that is probably a different story . Typically with a flat roof , the risk for ice or snow damage is greatly increased , so your policy is either much more expensive , or that damage is excluded . Call your agent to be certain in either case . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
Homeownersinsurance often called hazardinsurancehas three -LRB- 3 -RRB- policy form types known as Basic , Broad and Special . Basic form will cover Fire Lightning InternalExplosion Windstorm or Hail Explosion Smoke Aircraft or Vehicle Riot or Civilcommotion Volcanic eruption Vandalism Broad form will cover all the above and add : Burglarydamage Falling Objects Weight of Ice and Snow Water Damage by pipes bursting -LRB- pipe itself is not covered for this peril -RRB- Discharge , overflow steam Freezing of plumbing Artificiallygenerated electricity Special formcoverseverythingexcept that is not specifically excluded : Below or the most common exclusions Ordinance or Law Earthquake Flood Power failure Neglect War Nuclearhazard intentional act Insects orVermin Special form has two type of form known as HO3 and HO5 in which you can increase or add specifically limitedcoverage ` ssuch as jewelry . Talk to your local agent so he can access your specific needs for homeownersinsurance . Your home is one of your most importantassists and needs to be properly protected .
Perhaps yes , but it is important to talk to your insurance professional about your policy and the cause of the leak . If the damage is caused by a covered loss , then the claim will be settled but of course subject to your deductible . Here in CT this past winter we once again saw a number of claims lke this that were ice dam related .
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How To Appeal A Long Term Care Insurance Denial ?
To appeal a Long Term Care Insurance denial or Life Insurance denial , you must first find out the reason for the denial . It may simply be that the company was unable to secure a certain set of medical records , and thus could not make a decision based on lack of information . You might be able to track down those medical records and be able to be approved . Or , your medical records or MIB may state your health in a mistaken way . You may be able to do additional testing to disprove that , or get an informative letter from your doctor stating the correct information . This can be submitted directly to the underwriter and/or to the MIB to get your information there corrected .
To appeal a Long Term Care Insurance denial or Life Insurance denial , you must first find out the reason for the denial . It may simply be that the company was unable to secure a certain set of medical records , and thus could not make a decision based on lack of information . You might be able to track down those medical records and be able to be approved . Or , your medical records or MIB may state your health in a mistaken way . You may be able to do additional testing to disprove that , or get an informative letter from your doctor stating the correct information . This can be submitted directly to the underwriter and/or to the MIB to get your information there corrected .
The majority of life insurance denials are a result of something found in the paramedical exam from the applicant ` sblood orurine testor medical history that is outside the life insurance company 's standards . These `` standards '' can vary a bit from one company to the next . The insurance company is all about `` risk '' and if they see something they believe is significant , they may deny coverage . Another option they have is to `` rate '' the individual below what they call `` standard '' and that move by them would make the cost of insurance more expensive for the applicant because the insurance company sees that individual as a higher risk . There areother reasons as well which include driving record -LRB- 2 DUI 's can be trouble here -RRB- , repeated risky activities such as travel to what they consider dangerous destinations in the world , non-sanctioned vehicle racing -LRB- cars , motorcycles , etc -RRB- and others . One of the best ways to help avoid a denial of life insurance coverage is to work with a knowledgeable life insurance agent who , based on your complete medical history disclosed in advance of the application , will help determine which life insurance company could be the most forgiving for your particular situation . The underwriting process for life insurance can be appealed and if you are working with a knowledgeable agent , they may be able to help get the denial reversed .
The State Departments of Insurance -LRB- DOI -RRB- regulate and oversee long-term care insurance sold and administered in each state . The General Accounting Office of the federal government -LRB- GAO -RRB- works in concert with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- to monitor the activities of the State DOI , and audit their work as it relates to payment of claims by individual insurance carriers , rate changes and approvals , and sales practices . In 2008 , the GAO released a report `` State Oversight of Rate Setting and Claims Settlement Practices '' involving 10 sample states on the topicand reported the following : `` Regulators in the 10 states GAO reviewed oversee claims settlement practices by monitoring consumer complaints and conducting examinations in an effort to ensure that companies are complying with standards . Claims settlement standards in these states largely focus on timely investigation and payment of claims and prompt communication with consumers , but the standards adopted and how states define timeliness vary notably across the states . Regulators told GAO that reviewing consumer complaints is one of the primary methods for monitoring companies compliance with state standards . In addition to monitoring complaints , these regulators also said that they use examinations of company practices to identify any violations in standards that may require further action . Finally , state regulators in 6 of the 10 states in GAOs review reported that their states are considering additional protections related to claims settlement . For example , regulators in several states said that their states were considering an independent review process for consumers appealing claims denials . Such an addition may be useful as some regulators said that they lack authority to resolve complaints where , for example , the company and consumer disagree on a factual matter , such as a consumers eligibility for benefits . '' Each state has a DOI website which includes a subsection on long-term care insurance sold in that state . Their Internet addresses are usually something like www.insurance . -LSB- abbreviation of state , like ` AZ ' -RSB- . gov.They can also be googled '' -LSB- Name of state -RSB- State Department of Insurance '' .
If you write an appeal letter to your health insurance company , call the carrier or broker first to obtain a contact name and address . Be sure to include all pertinent facts about your claim denial and additional information that may cause an underwriter to consider changing their decision . It never cost anything to request a reversal .
An auto insurance carrier can deny a claim if the claim is outside of the scope of your policy 's provided coverages or if the claim is fraudulent in origin . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . If you feel that your claim is valid , appeal the denial with your local agent first .
According to most sources that gather such information , the percentage of the population of the United States that owns some type of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs is around 7 % and holding . While theprobability of needing some type of extended-care for performing daily activities before death is quite high -LRB- about 1 in 4 will need up to 2 years of long-term care , slightly lower for men and higher for women -RRB- , two human factors come into play when the discussing transferring the payment of costs for such care to an insurance company : fear and denial . People are generally afraid to even consider how awful it would be to not be able to successfully perform common daily activities and need help from someone to do so . Families assume that since mom and dad took care of them as babies , they will take care of mom and dad when they need roughly the same type of attention and care . Thus , they console their elderly parents not to worry and fret about it . Others are simply in denial . `` Just take me out back and shoot me '' is a common demonstration of denial . One agent I know told me about an adult daughter that took her dad up on that . She asked , `` When should I shoot you ? '' Her father said , `` I 'll tell you when '' . So , when he started to need help getting around and the daughter offered to help , she held up a toy gun and asked , `` Now ? '' The father said , `` No , but soon . '' Of course , his condition became worse and worse until finally , he needed to be admitted to full-time care in a facility . The daughter asked again , as she had over the years , `` Do I shoot you now ? '' But , by this time , the only response her father could give was a tear . He had lost his ability to speak . Cost has become a real deterrent to the purchase of long-term care insurance . However , those that have had to go through the experience of taking care of an aged loved one usually find some way to afford at least some amount of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs . This insurance is not about the insured . It 's about the care-giver . Approximately 7 % of Americans have figured that out .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
The market for Long Term Care Insurance really is not a small market . Thousands of people who need Long Term Care Insurance do not purchase it for one reason or another : price , denial , and lack of information all play a part . However , the market is reduced by age -LRB- most people do not have an interest in purchasing long term care insurance before age 50 -RRB- , health -LRB- at older ages , more people are disqualified due to health problems -RRB- , income -LRB- many retired persons do not have the income to sustain payment of long term care insurance premiums -RRB- , and assets -LRB- without assets to protect , there is less need for LTCI coverage -RRB- .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Is long term care insurance worth it ? Well , most people who purchase long term care do so for a couple of reasons . First the idea of spending down their assets to gain public assistance does n't appeal . Second , they know the Long Term Care Insurance will protect their assets allowing them to receive care covered by their insurance rather than the sale of their assets .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
If you are talking about a denial to an application for long term care insurance , there are several steps you can take : 1 -RRB- Find out the reason for the denial . 2 -RRB- If the reason is a mistake -LRB- e.g. your medical records say you were diagnosed with CHF but they later found out you did not have CHF -RRB- , get a letter from your doctor succinctly explaining that , along with correct medical records , if possible . 3 -RRB- If the reason was high blood pressure at the insurance exam , high cholesterol on their labs , etc , offer to pay for a blood pressure reading at your doctor 's office , or a new blood test . Declines for any type of insurance are usually final , but sometimes you can reverse them . Using an agency that has lots of experience with impaired risk cases helps .
how to write an appeal letter for Disability Insurance ? If you 've been declined for issue of a Disability policy you can appeal to the underwriter to reconsider the decline if you have additional information to offer or there is some change to what is in question . Underwriters , especially disability coverage underwriters work under strict guidelines . In order to appeal you must be able to introduce new information . Usually with a decline , the letter will provide the reason for .
There is no limit on how long you have to collect the death benefit on a policy for which you were named beneficiary . There is a time limit for how long you can contest a policy for which denial of benefits was made due to misrepresentation on the application . This varies from state to state .
The most common approachto file an appeal to a Medicare claimis to complete a `` redetermination request form , '' and send it to theMedicare contractor at the address listed on your Medicare Summary Notice . You should circle the items your would like appealed , explain in writing -LRB- with as much detail as possible -RRB- why you disagree with the original determination , and include as much information as possible to back up your case . An appeal will always have a much higher likelihood of succeeding if your doctor or other health care provider also supplies a written statement backing your position .
Maybe . First , you must examine your policy to see if there is a universal denial of coverage for any mold damage . If there is then you are out of luck . However , if there is no such denial of coverage , move on to step 2 . Second , determine the source of the mold . This is important because mold needs moisture to grow . If your mold problem can be traced to a pipe bursting and spraying water all over your home , then you can make the claim . If the mold is growing because your house is old and moisture got in due to lack of maintenance , then you are out of luck . Another example is water backup , if your sewage drain backs up and you have resultant damage , without a sewer/drain backup endorsement you will be denied coverage . So , in summary : 1 -RRB- is mold excluded no matter what ; and 2 -RRB- if mold is not excluded , was it caused by a covered cause of loss ?
Being denied after applying for a life insurance policy can be a disheartening experience . But there are steps that you can take AFTER a life insurance denial , to assure you that there are no other options or get you at least some coverage -LRB- because there is almost always SOME coverage to be had -RRB- . If you had an agency that you trust and that has kept good contact with you throughout the underwriting process , I recommend that you follow up with whatever steps they suggest , first . People often panic after a decline , when just providing some additional medical records , filling out that last form , or getting a letter from your doctor can turn things around . If you do feel that your agency was not up to the challenge your health or other risk factors presented , find a good impaired risk life insurance agent before giving up . Someone who is experienced with those types of issues , and who has access to many different companies , may be able to find you that same policy with another company . It gives us an advantage to know the reason for your denial , as we can start ahead of where you left off . A significant percentage of my clients were declined for life insurance before contacting our office Please do not hesitate to give me a ring if you would like to see what we can do for you .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Disputing a health insurance claim , or what usually is the rejection of a health insurance claim is an appeals process . All carriers give the insured the opportunity to appeal a decision . This process is usually lengthy and in my experience often unsuccessful . Do n't let that stop you from getting what you deserve however . As an experienced agent , if my client feels the carrier should have paid , then I encourage and assist in the process .
end question
