start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Part A Cover Ambulance Service ?
Ambulance services would be covered under Medicare Part B , not Part A - the ambulance services would be covered in emergency situations and other means of transportation are unavailable/endanger the health of the individual.The ambulance must take you to the nearest medical facility -LRB- generally a hospital -RRB- that can provide you care . In some instances , you may be able to get covered ambulance transportation in a non-emergency situation if you meet certain conditions -LRB- e.g. your doctor deems its medically necessary , traveling to a medical facility by other means would put your health at risk - you may want to check with Medicare to get full specifics on what conditions are required to be covered in a non-emergency setting where transportation by ambulance is needed -RRB- . Please feel free to contact me if you have any otherquestions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A is , in short , your hospital insurance . It covers inpatient hospital care , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hopsice care , and home health services . Please note , there are limitations to what Medicare pays and for how long it will pay for given services . If you want to have adequate coverage for long-term care types of services -LRB- e.g. nursing home care , hospice care , and home services -RRB- , you will want to supplement your Medicare coverage with a separate long-term care policy . Medicare Part B is , in short , your physician insurance . This part of Medicare covers things like doctor visits , lab tests , surgeries , ambulance services , durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- , and other outpatient services . Medicare Part A & Part B are commonly referred to as Original Medicare and only covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of expenses . While 20 % does n't seem like it 's going to have a high dollar figure , the bill can add up quite fast . The idea of a Medigap plan is to create a predictable expense structure . If you do n't have a Medigap plan and visited the hospital/had a surgery/etc . , you 'll end up with a massive medical bill real quick . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Ambulance services would be covered under Medicare Part B , not Part A - the ambulance services would be covered in emergency situations and other means of transportation are unavailable/endanger the health of the individual.The ambulance must take you to the nearest medical facility -LRB- generally a hospital -RRB- that can provide you care . In some instances , you may be able to get covered ambulance transportation in a non-emergency situation if you meet certain conditions -LRB- e.g. your doctor deems its medically necessary , traveling to a medical facility by other means would put your health at risk - you may want to check with Medicare to get full specifics on what conditions are required to be covered in a non-emergency setting where transportation by ambulance is needed -RRB- . Please feel free to contact me if you have any otherquestions . Thanks very much .
Under Part B of Medicare ambulance services are covered . Medicare will cover 80 % of your ambulance ride if it is a medical emergency and every second counts getting you to a hospital for treatment . There are some non-emergency reasons that Medicare will cover an ambulance ride . If Medicare disagrees with your decision to use an ambulance you will be responsible for 100 % of the charges . In other words do not use an ambulance as an alternate method of transportation if it is not a medical emergency .
Medicare covers ambulance rides when they are used for emergency situations and medically necessary to transport the patient to the nearest facility for care , and when other transportation would endanger the patient 's health . The ambulance must be Medicare approved . Medicare may cover ambulance rides for non-emergency services if there is a written note from the doctor stating that such transportation is needed to not endanger the patient 's health . Instances where ambulance may be approved for non-emergency situations are for treatment for end stage renal disease , transportation to the doctor when the patient is bedridden , and when there is need for the medical services offered on the ambulance while making the trip .
Medicare Part B covers services and supplies that are needed to prevent or treat diseases or health conditions . While Medicare Part A generally covers time spent in the hospital -LRB- in addition to skilled nursing facilities and some other services -RRB- , Medicare Part B generally covers medically necessary doctors ' services , hospital outpatient services , durable medical equipment , preventative care , labs and tests , ambulance , and some other services .
Medicare Part A is called Hospital Insurance . With some exceptions , it covers inpatient services at hospitals , skilled nursing facilities and rehab facilities , as well as home health and hospice services . Medicare Part B is called Medical Insurance . Again , with some exceptions , it covers doctor 's services , durable medical equipment , hospital outpatient services , labs , mental health care , some preventative care , and some home health and ambulance services . All the services must be medically necessary and must be approved by Medicare to be covered .
Medicare Part B will cover ambulance services that are medically necessary . Even though original Medicare does not have networks , you need to understand that Medicare has a fee schedule for things such as medical transport companies . What Medicare is willing to pay for ambulance transport may not be enough to satisfy the bill presented by the ambulance company .
Ambulance rides , or any other emergency medical transportation , including vehicles equipped for land , air or sea , may be covered by your health plan . Coverage may vary from plan to plan and may be subject to your deductibles and coinsurance . Also , whether your ambulance service provider is considered in network or out of network may also affect your coverage . There may also be restrictions on whether or not the transportation is deemed medically necessary or not . If the service provided was deemed not medically necessary , or does not meet the definition of medical necessity , you may be responsible for the full amount of the service provided . If you have received emergency ambulance services and receive a bill , be sure to submit it to your health insurance company to seek payment or reimbursement . Also , there could be a limit , or cap , to what your insurance company may pay . So even if you do have coverage , you may still be responsible for a portion of the bill even after your deductible and coinsurance is paid . Be sure to read your Medical Policy , usually a booklet or pamphlet that your health insurance provider sends with your policy . If you do not have one , call the Customer Service Number , or many companies have the information online .
Medicare covers ground ambulance transportation when you need to be transported to a hospital , critical access hospital , or skilled nursing facility for MEDICALLY NECCESARY services , and transportation in any other vehicle could endanger your health . Medicare MAY pay for emergency ambulance transportation in an airplane or helicopter to a hospital if you need immediate and rapid ambulance transportation that ground ambulance ca n't provide . You pay 20 % of the Medicare-approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . - Medicare & You 2013 -
Medicare will pay for ambulance services that are medically necessary . If you are in need of urgent medical care and need a medical transport company to take you to the hospital , those services are covered by Medicare Part B . The biggest issue Medicare beneficiaries face with ambulance charges are in dealing with providers that do not accept Medicare assignment . The excess charges are not covered by Medicare .
Yes , Medicare will pay for ambulance rides that are medically necessary , with a Medicare approved supplier . If emergency services that are needed to save your life , Medicare will always pay for ambulance rides . If non-emergency services , you must either be confined to bed or need the medical equipment the ambulance provides , in order for the ride to be paid for by Medicare .
Medicare part A which covers medical expenses resulting from hospital services is financed by payroll taxes on workers in employment covered by OASDI -LRB- Old-Age , Survivors , And Disability Insurance -RRB- on a pay as you go basis . Medicare part B which covers partial reimbursement for the cost of physician services , diagnostic tests , ambulance services , prosthetic devices , physical therapy , medical equipment , and home health services is funded primarily through the premiums of those enrolled and is not `` pay as you go '' .
Medicare Part B covers certain doctor 's services , outpatient care , medical supplies including medical equipment , some preventative services such as flu shots , ambulance , mental health , and limited outpatient prescription drugs . There is a co-pay required for benefits received under Medicare Part B. Medicare supplement plans can cover the co-pay and pay for things that Medicare Part A and B do not cover .
Medicare Part B covers emergency ambulance transport to a hospital when you 're unable to be transported by other means -LRB- e.g. car or a taxi -RRB- or your need medical care during transport . The ambulance must take you to the nearest medical facility -LRB- generally a hospital -RRB- that can provide you care . In some instances , you may be able to get covered ambulance transportation in a non-emergency situation if you meet certain conditions -LRB- e.g. your doctor deems its medically necessary , traveling to a medical facility by other means would put your health at risk - you may want to check with Medicare to get full specifics on what conditions are required to be covered in a non-emergency setting where transportation by ambulance is needed -RRB- .
Enrollment in Medicare Part D is to help pay for prescription drugs . Medicare Part A pays for hospitalization , skilled nursing care , home health , and hospice . Medicare Part B pays for medically necessary and preventative services , plus medical equipment , mental health treatment , ambulance , and limited outpatient drugs . Prescription drugs can be a huge part of health care costs , so Medicare Part D helps offset that part of health care costs .
In short , Medicare will not pay anything for non-emergency transportation - ambulatory services are covered in emergencies . However , Part B can provide some benefits for nonemergency ambulance transportation between home and a hospital if the patient 's doctor certifies IN WRITING that transportation in something other than an ambulance would endanger their health . Confirm with your doctor and Medicare first to make sure you would n't get stuck with the bill in this situation .
Medicare covers emergency ambulance transportation when you need to be transported to a hospital or a skilled nursing facility . Keep in mind this transportation is when you 've had a medical emergency and your health is in serious danger and you cant be safely transported by a car or taxi . Medicare coverage depends on the seriousness of your medical condition and whether you could have been safely transported by other means . Medicare will only cover ambulance services to the nearest medical facility that can give you the care you need .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
What Illnesses Are Covered By Critical Illness Insurance ?
It depends on the policy , but here are a few of the more common ones . Heart attack , stroke , cancer -LRB- internal and some skin cancers -RRB- , ALS , MS , kidney failure , Parkinson 's , blindness . Each policy is different both in terms of what is covered and the definition . Always buy a health insurance policy not a life policy with a rider .
Critical insurance policies each have their own set of criteria , so you must review the policy features to know what illnesses your critical illness insurance policy will cover . Some that can be included are : 1 -RRB- Cancer -LRB- it may require a certain stage to be covered -RRB- 2 -RRB- Stroke 3 -RRB- Heart Attack 4 -RRB- Coronary Bypass 5 -RRB- Deafness 6 -RRB- Blindness 7 -RRB- Multiple Sclerosis 8 -RRB- Organ Transplant 9 -RRB- Kidney Failure 10 -RRB- Heart Valve Replacement 11 -RRB- Alzheimer 's Disease 12 -RRB- Paralysis
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
Accident and Critical illness insurance are similar in structure , but cover different things . Both policies will typically pay out a lump sum or up the benefit amount directly to the insured or a provider of their choice . The difference however is that accident plans only cover medical expenses associated with an accident where as critical illness insurance pays lump sum upon diagnosis of a major critical illness . Make sure to read the list of covered critical illness ' in the policy before purchasing .
Life insurance covers you in the event of death . Critical illness covers you while you are alive , providing cash to care for the extra expenses involved with a critical illness . Some life insurance policies offer a critical illness rider that will pay a portion of the death benefit while you are still alive . if you are diagnosed with a critical illness
This depends on the amount of money that you have saved to cover the costs associated with the immediate needs of a critical illness . If you have funds available to cover medical expenses of a critical illness , you may not need critical illness insurance . If you do not have the extra funds , than critical illness insurance can keep you from financial ruin .
In sports there are `` odds '' ... What are the odds of hitting a hole in one ? An average golfer on a 200-yard par-3 : 150,000 to 1 . Odds of myself or David/Ted -LRB- above -RRB- ... one in TWO ... Ladies are lucky ... it 's only 1 on 3 ... So yes , `` cancer insurance '' is a great protection plan to own . Let 's compare Cancer insurance to protection plan that is growing in popularity , Critical Illness -LRB- CI -RRB- . Cancer insurance covers ?? ... . YES ... ding , ding , ding ... cancer . Most benefits are paid out on a scheduled basis . Meaning you get `` so much for each item eligible for a claim '' . Each treatment/service has a named value : Chemo - So much per treatment . Surgery - a specific amount . Hospital stay - A specific amount per day . Possibly more for ICU . & it goes on ... . Critical Illness pays a lump sum upon diagnosis . There is no need to continually update the carrier about treatments , surgeries , & hospital stays . Think of it as upfront money vs. trickling in over time . Since Critical Illness Insurance typically ahs a benefit for Cancer , heart attack/stroke , and other life changing illnesses -LRB- like blindness & paralysis -RRB- , the one policy can do a lot more for you over a lifetime . Which is better , Cancer or Critical Illness insurance ? As you will see in many of my posts ... UNDERWRITING is the key . Always buy the most coverage for your monthly premium dollars based on the underwriting . - gravy
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Critical illness is a specialized form of what used to be called `` dread disease '' coverage . More comprehensive than a simple cancer plan , critical illness policies normally pay a lump sum benefit on first diagnosis of listed medical conditions including heart attack , cancer , stroke and another 3 - 7 named conditions . Most carriers do not issue critical illness after age 65 or 70 . Buy a health insurance plan , not a life plan with a critical illness rider .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
Generally , critical illness insurance is not a taxable benefit . The money that is used to purchase critical illness insurance has already been taxed , since critical illness insurance is not tax exempt as a medical expense . Thus , the benefits paid if the critical illness policy pays out , are not taxable .
Critical illness policies cover as many as 15 or so different kinds of illness . Most critical illness plans pay a lump sum cash benefit on first diagnosis provided you meet the terms of the policy . In evaluating critical illness plans read and understand the definitions and make sure you buy a health based plan .
They are two totally different policies . Critical Illness pays if you are diagnosed with a critical illness such as heart attack or stroke or other critical illness . A disability policy covers you if you are unable to perform your job due to an accident or illness . It will pay a percentage of your income for a specified period .
If you have a family history of any of the illnesses covered by Critical Illness Insurance , and if paying the premium for the policy is not a problem for you , getting Critical Illness Insurance could be a good move . We all know people who have developed cancer , stroke , etc and their Critical Illness policy has pulled through for them with extra cash at a very traumatic time . When those diseases run in the family , having this coverage can also supply peace of mind .
You should look into critical illness as a part of your medical insurance defensive planning . If your family has a predisposition to disease or confinement based of a disposition to illness , then you should consider critical illness insurance . Your vocation may have health consequences not paid by workers compensation . If thats true or highly possible then you should consider critical illness .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Important Is Homeowners Insurance ?
That 's a great question ! Let 's answer it this way : How would you be financially if you purchase your home , take out a big mortgage to pay for it , buy new furniture and appliances to fill the house , get all of your belongings in it , and then it catches fire and is gone ? Would you be able to start from scratch and repay the mortgage ? Or how about if a visitor fell down some steps in your home , and had to be hospitalized . Would you be able to pay the bills and possible law suit damages that you are liable for ? These are two really good reasons why homeowners is important , and most lenders will not sign off on your mortgage unless their investment is protected somehow . I hope that helps you decide to insure your home . Thank you for asking !
Homeowners insurance is important part of helping to protect yours ' and your family financial futures . A home is a huge investment without homeowners insurance how will you rebuild after a fire or tornado . How will your protect your assets if someone is hurt on your property if you do n't have homeowners insurance ? This is just a couple of the coverages that are provided by homeowners insurance . To find out more about what a homeowners insurance policy has to offer contact your local agent .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
As long as you work with a broker who understands the process , it 's very easy to switch homeowners insurance . Remember that your mortgage company will need to be advised of this change . Also remember that your homeowners insurance may be part of your mortgage payment , so it 's important to make sure the escrow is straightened out properly . It 's also very important that you not cancel your old homeowners insurance until you have evidence of the new policy starting .
The best and most honest single piece of advice when selecting a Home Insurance Contract is to make a list of items most important to you , do not place yourself in a situation where you have to make a rushed decision and always place the cost -LRB- Premium -RRB- -LRB- $ $ $ -RRB- as the last item of importance . Having stated the above , more than 90 % of homeowners simply call two or three insurance carriers in a rush to obtain a quick quote thereby comparing the 2 or 3 prices quoted and rush to purchasing a new home insurance policy . Coverage is the primary purpose of the insurance policy ; there are a variety of coverage items that conclude an insurance contract . The Dwelling , Other Structures , Personal Property , Additional Living Expenses -LRB- Loss of Use -RRB- , Personal Liability & Guest Medical Payments . In the event of a loss , each of the coverage items suddenly becomes very important to the homeowner ; for this reason , when purchasing a policy it is important to take the time to review coverage . A thorough review should n't take you more than an hour and it should n't be necessary every year unless there has been a change in insurable interest . The policy should cover your property on a replacement cost basis , you should review any additional available endorsements and make sure that your coverage limits are sufficient to protect you in the event of a loss . If after your thorough review , you feel that the premium is too high , it may be advisable for you to reduce the carrier 's risk by increasing your deductible thereby reducing the premium . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
In Arkansas , as in every other state the best homeowners policy is the one that is in force and pays the maximum amount at the time of loss . While premium is important , having the correct limits is much more important . It is also important to understand how claims are going to be settled . It is such a disappointment when a policyholder has damage to their property and find that it will be settled based on its price as a used item . This is particularly true when they need to replace the item with a new one . Check with your agent , that is the best source for the best insurance .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
There are various deductibles in homeowner policies . The higher the chosen amount of the deductible , often between $ 100 and $ 1,000 or more in a typical homeowner policy , the lower the premium you should be paying . The amount you choose as your deductible is what you as a homeowner will absorb in the event of a covered loss . Once the amount of a covered loss is determined , the insurance carrier responds by paying the claim less the homeowner deductible . Generally you choose the amount of your deductible by determining the highest amount you are willing to pay on your own in the event of a covered loss . How much risk can you afford to hold ? Toward determining this , it is important to remember that you do not want to be submitting claims for small losses . A poor loss history will work against you in the long run . So , use that as another determining factor in the amount of your chosen deductible . Always ask your independent agent to help you with this process .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance is protection for the primary home of the titled owner of a house . Thus , the titled owner may purchase homeowners insurance for his/her home.The homeowners insurance contract has a conditional clause stating that without ownership , there is no coverage . It is important to review the definitions section of the homeowners contract to assure that coverage is intact per the contract . If you are in the process of purchasing a home , it is common to obtain a quote and purchase insurance a few days prior to the close of escrow ; this is done in order to have the insurance in place prior to the transfer of ownership . A mortgage loan can not be funded without the security of insurance to release the funds . For a quote online , you may go to : WEBSITELINK
The declarations contain the specific information that tailors the homeowners policy to be your homeowners policy . It lists you and your lender ; it has the limits , prices and other important information . There is a list on the declaration that shows pages that are attached to comprise the entire policy . That list can be quite important and should not be overlooked when you receive your policy .
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
Located near the front of the policy , the declaration page lists the information that personalizes the coverage found in the following pages . It also lists all the forms that comprise the policy . This is sort of a table of contents . Your mortgage company will want a copy of this page of your policy . You should review it carefully as it contains a great deal of very important information When you look at the declaration page you can identify the name of the insurance company . Agents often represent multiple companies and this tells you exactly which company is insuring your home . Here you will find the policy number which represents the individual nature of the contract . The declaration page will describe the type of policy . There are several different forms of homeowners policies and this will tell you which form is being used . The declaration page will identify who is being insured . This is very important , particularly when there is a liability claim . The named insured should read like the deed to the property . The property should be clearly identified . There may be more than one insured and their relationship is often included in the declaration . This is where the mortgage company will be identified and the address of the company will be included , along with the loan number . Additional mortgagees can also be listed here with the same information . The name and address of the agent handling the policy also appears in the same general area . This is where you can go for service on the policy . The declarations make very important statements setting the coverage limits . While they are often identified by letters -LRB- A-M -RRB- there will be definitions in the subsequent pages . This shows the limit of each of the coverages in the policy . It usually shows the limit of liability . It usually shows the deductible applied to property claims , and states the annual premium for the policy . There is a lengthy list of forms that comprise the bulk of the policy . These attached pages detail exactly the nature and extent of the coverages , and the limits and exclusions that apply . As a homeowner you should look down this list and ask the agent to explain any coverage that you dont understand . This can trigger conversations about additional available coverages that might be appropriate for you and which you should have . This is a very important section and one that you dont want to overlook . After this is usually a general description of the property itself . It will identify the fire district , location of the nearest fire hydrant , proximity to a fire station and the protection class used to develop the premium . It will probably comment on the roof and indicate if there is any special rating applied . The company has relied on this information much of which youre provided and it should be correct . It is quite likely that your state has laws that require certain notifications to be on the declaration page , perhaps warning you that the policy does not cover flood , earthquake or building code upgrade coverage . Finally the declaration page will identify the company , its address , telephone number and state who is paying the premium and the address where communications are being sent .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
Homeowners insurance does cover solar panels as once they are installed they become part of the home . It is very important however that you notify your insurance company of the solar panels so the proper dwelling replacement amount is reflected on your policy . This would insure there are no problems should a claimarise Keep in mind the solar panels are covered for the perils of the policy . Talk to your local agent about how your homeowners policy covers solar panels .
-- > Normal 0 Of course , the most important issue to consider before selecting any insurance company is be certain they are financially sound and able to back up the promises they make in their insurance policies . Beyond that , for a homeowners policy consider what you are looking for . Why even consider any agent or insurance company if they are unwilling or unable to offer the coverage you want and need ? So , what do you want your home policy to do ? Rebuild your home if it is destroyed ? Pay you to replace your personal property if it is damaged or destroyed ? Defend you and pay a judgment if you are sued for injuring someone or damaging his or her property ? If so , Id suggest looking for an insurer that offers : Guaranteed Replacement Cost Coverage on your home . Many companies dont . Most insurance companies will pay you to rebuild your house but they will stop paying when you limit is reached . Following a major storm , wild fire or other disaster , building materials and available labor become scarce . Prices increase and consumers find they may not have enough insurance . Guaranteed Replacement Cost Coverage automatically increases your limit to whatever you need to rebuild your home , even if it is double or triple the amount of insurance you carry . Replacement Cost and Special Coverage on your personal property . Most homeowners policies limit coverage on your personal property to a number of specific named perils . Look for insurers who offer Special Coverage , often referred to as all - risk , replacement cost coverage not only on your home but your personal property as well . Personal Liability coverage is an important yet often overlooked part of your homeowners policy . Many families include high limit Personal Umbrella coverage as part of their insurance program . Personal Umbrellas are often considered the least expensive way to purchase high personal liability limits . In addition , these policies should have broader insuring agreements with fewer exclusions and limitations than standard home and auto policies . If these features are available , I would then consider the annual premium and possibly the availability of a local agent who is committed to assisting you should you have a problem .
Home Insurance , Hazard Insurance or Property Insurance are synonymous general terms . 1 - 4 unit homes are usually protected by a Homeowners Insurance Policy -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy -LRB- Tenant Occupied -RRB- . The Homeowners Insurance Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Personal Property , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others most commonly written on Form HO-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . The Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Loss of Rent , and Premises Liabilitymost commonly written on Form DP-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
If a fallen tree , whether your own or your neighbors , has landed in your yard , on car or on your home , you are likely wondering whether your current homeowners insurance policy will cover the repair costs . Damage to your home and its contents , regardless of whether the trees origin was from your own property or a neighboring , is covered under a homeowners policy . For property such as sheds , additions or detached garages , there is generally a maximum amount of coverage offered for fallen tree damage -LRB- i.e. 10 % of your entire propertys value -RRB- . Even though your homeowners insurance policy will cover damage resulting from fallen trees , it is important to keep in mind that you are financially responsible for any applicable policy deductible . For example , if your homeowners insurance policy has a $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 deductible and the total cost of repairs is $ 25,000 , you will be required to pay either $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 out of pocket for the clean-up to be completed . If the fallen tree was from your neighbors yard , it is possible that your insurance company will attempt to get their policy to cover the cost of the damage . In this event , you may be refunded any deductible you paid for the repairs .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Is Health Insurance With Obamacare ?
In addition to Jason 's excellent and accurate answer above ... the cost to the insured may be lower than the total premium if they qualify for an advanced premium tax credit and decide to take it . If they qualify for the subsidy and do n't take it in advance they will still receive the money in the form of a tax refund the following year . A large portion of the countries population qualified for tax credits this year and reduced their overall premiums significantly . It 's vital to work with a marketplace certified and experienced health insurance agent to help you navigate these areas .
As an individual your health insurance rates will be determined by your geographic locale , your age , whether or not you use tobacco and the level of coverage you desire or can afford -LRB- whichever comes first -RRB- . After that you and your family have to fall within certain adjusted grossincomeranges of the Federal Poverty Level -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level in most states -RRB- in order to determine what level of premium subsidy -LRB- if any -RRB- you might qualify forplus any additional reductions in out-of-pocket expense subsidy a person might qualify for . How much is ObamaCare for you ? No one can tell you without the information I 've outlined above . On a national average basis , preliminary 2014 premium cost was around $ 328 but that 's a meaningless figure as it relates to your particular situation . As it is after the end of the open enrollment period for this year I am somewhat concerned that you are still looking for insurance . If you have recently aged off of a parent 's plan or had a change of life status event like a divorce you do have 60-days to apply for individual coverage . Please feel free to contact me if you need any assistance .
If you 're an individual buying on or off the exchange -LRB- and not securing group coverage through an employer -RRB- , you need to consider the level plan you want . There are four metal plans : bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Bronze plans generally cover about 60 % of your healthcare expenses , Silver is 70 % , Gold is 80 % , and Platinum is 90 % . So , in short , the better the benefits that you want to have , the higher the premium will be.There 's also a catastrophic plan , but these are only available to individuals under age 30 . How much your health insurance costs is going to depend on several factors : your age , where you live -LRB- zip code -RRB- , what level plan you want , and which carrier your policy will be with . There are many factors that go into the pricing of a product for a specific area . Everyone 's tolerance for cost is different as well . I recommend contacting an independent broker to help get yourself set up with a health insurance plan .
Health insurance with Obamacare can be very affordable ... if you qualify for a subsidy . I 'll be very brief and accurate when answering this question . The cost of health insurance will vary depending upon where you live , your household income , your age and your smoking status . An experienced broker should help you -LRB- no charge of course -RRB- so you save time , money and frustration ! Quotes are free ! Live answer provided by : Ed Harris - Experienced health insurance broker -LRB- for 33 years -RRB- with top-rated website .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
No . You are making the mistake that many people are making in thinking that ObamaCare is an insurance plan , it is not . ObamaCare or the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- as that is its true title -RRB- is a massive law accompanied by an even more massive set of administrative guidelines that set new rules for how health insurance plans are offered , priced , structured . Plus it did create the online government health insurance marketplaces -LRB- e.g. - HealthCare.gov -RRB- as a supposedly simpler way for people to purchase individual health insurance and possibly receive subsidies for the cost of their health insurance . ObamaCare is in no way a government health insurance program such as Medicaid or Medicare .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
No . ObamaCare is a name that has become attached to a law passed in 2010 called the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- , it is also sometimes referred to as the `` Affordable Care Act '' . This legislation was a centerpiece of the Obama administration 's political agenda and it significantly re-engineered the health insurance industry through such actions as making policies guaranteed to be issued , eliminating pre-existing condition exclusions and limitations , requiring that all policies cover certain `` Minimum Essential Benefits '' and creating Federal or State run health insurance marketplaces to facilitate the purchasing of health insurance and perhaps subsidizing the cost of health insurance policies for people below 400 % of the Federal Poverty Line . ObamaCare itself provides no health insurance coverage . That is still a function of health insurance companies now operating under the requirements of ObamaCare .
Obamacare is working well in California . Obamacare was intended to help Americans who could not previously afford health insurance get insured . People with bad health -LRB- heart disease , obesity , cancer -RRB- often were denied coverage or charged a very high premium . Now these folks are charged the same rate as everyone else . People with low income were often priced out of the insurance market as well . It was not reasonable to expect a person making $ 25,000 a year to spend 15 % of their income on health insurance . Under ObamaCare people making under $ 48,000 per year are eligible for premium assistance . WEBSITELINK - In this video I show you how a 30 year old earning $ 25,000 per year can get a policy for just $ 18 per month .
No one will be able to give you a perfect answer to this question until we have 2015 in the rear view mirror . Health insurance costs have always varied from state to state and ObamaCare has made the contrast between states quite stark in some cases . Combine this with the fact that how individual health insurance products were designed , rated and sold all underwent the biggest simultaneous change in the industry 's history and you have a situation where the entire health insurance marketplace has been turned upside down and we have a very foggy situation . In general terms , most individual consumers should anticipate at least a 10 % increase in their 2015 rates and be prepared to shop their coverage . Your results in your state may be quite different and it is not uncommon for some people to be receiving significantly higher rates increases . Rate filings for 2015 paint a confusing picture . Some state 's are reporting very moderate 2015 rate changes but those were also often the same states whose 2014 rates jumped the most . So , perhaps these state 's overpriced in year 1 of ObamaCare and the fact that they were only slightly off even then is n't exactly cause for cheer . Other states are seeing much higher rate increases for 2015 . Another factor complicating the cost picture are the government health insurance marketplaces themselves . Because of government administrative policies , the insurance carrier who has the second lowest cost Silver level product in each marketplace sets the bar for the amount that the government 's premium subsidy will be calculated to support . Owning this price point is a key competitive placement for the health insurance carriers in the marketplace . In year 1 this pricing position was usually held by a Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan or a national insurance carrier . In year 2 , many of year 1 's benchmark plans are now priced higher and have been replaced by a new plan and/or insurance carrier as the benchmark silver plan . And , in several states , the price leading plans in year 2 are experimental creations of ObamaCare called Co-Ops . These are non-profit programs that fill the role of a health insurance plan but are initially funded with Federal grant dollars . The year 1 track record of the Co-Op plans was mixed at best . Their year 2 positioning indicates a move to buy up market share quickly as the Federal grant dollars have a limited life span . Whether these experiments will be able to quickly develop the skills , financial reserves and enrollment base to allow them to survive independently is highly debatable .
How do you define cheap ? In 2014 the average monthly cost for a Silver level ObamaCare compliant major medical plan was $ 328 . By that standard any coverage costing less than that would be `` cheap '' . People who qualify for little or no subsidy of their individual health insurance -LRB- shame on you for making more than $ 42,000 annually -RRB- may argue that $ 328 or more per month for health insurance is n't affordable much less cheap . But the folks in Washington , D.C. know better about these things than you do . Some people who are healthy and are low consumers of health care services have turned to Short Term Medical plans as a more affordable option for health insurance coverage . And , indeed this may work out well for some people as Short Term Medical policies are generally cheaper than individual major medical policies . However , before pursuing this strategy you do need to be aware that Short Term Medical plans do n't cover pre-existing conditions , usually do n't cover preventive care , may not cover prescription drugs and may have other limitations . Also , they do not meet the criteria under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual coverage mandate and therefore can leave you vulnerable to a tax penalty for noncompliance . You should seek out an experienced health insurance agent to discuss your needs and options and to fully understand whatever health insurance product it is that you purchase .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
There are multiple ways to get health insurance for you and your family and , depending on where you live , a wide array of options for health insurance coverage types and cost points . With the implementation of the ObamaCare requirements individual health insurance plans and costs have been transformed dramatically and the consumer needs to exercise great care in making their health plan selection . My first and best recommendation is to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is certified to sell health insurance coverage both on and off of the government health insurance marketplace in your state of residence . There can be much more involved in a health insurance plan than what a bullet points overview of the plan 's benefits are and its monthly premium . A knowledgeable health insurance agent can explain if a given plan covers you if you go outside its network , if it has a broad or a narrow pharmacy network , if the plan 's medical deductible applies per person covered or is aggregated for the family , and a whole lot of other things you should know before making your purchasing decision . Under ObamaCare if you purchase a health insurance plan you later learn you do n't like it 's not just a simple matter of cancelling your coverage and enrolling with another insurance carrier . So , buyer beware . If you and your family have income levels below 100 % or 138 % -LRB- depending upon the state you live in -RRB- of the Federal Poverty Level then you will qualify for coverage under your state 's Medicaid plan . In that event you need to contact your state government 's Medicaid office . Of course , there is the HealthCare.gov web site that you can go to and shop for coverage and enroll online . Quite frankly , while HealthCare.gov has improved somewhat over last year 's rocky start , I find most consumers still have a hard time truly understanding the information as it is presented on HealthCare.gov and they still need a knowledgeable person to explain the differences between various plan offerings and how to approach the subsidy process . Also , there are other online sites available , some with telephonic support to help answer a person 's questions . This can be kind of crap shoot though as you may or may not be talking to someone who understands the details of your particular location 's health plan options and they are n't doing much more than reading you a summary off of their own computer screen . So , remember , health insurance is still a very local product and varies from state to state and even within different areas within a state . You will be best served to deal with someone who is more locally based in most cases .
Let us begin by being clear on what ObamaCare is not . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- a.k.a. - ObamaCare -RRB- does not in itself provide insurance to anyone . ObamaCare is a bureaucratic & administrative structure that imposes requirements on the private health insurance system and , where accepted by state governments , expands the eligibility range for qualifying for Medicaid . It is funded through government appropriations channeled through several departments of the government -LRB- Health & Human Services , IRS , DOL , etc. -RRB- , a wide range of new taxes -LRB- tanning salons , medical devices , taxes on Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans , taxes on health insurance companies , increased Medicare Part A tax on high income wage earners are few examples -RRB- , changes to existing tax breaks -LRB- reducing the FSA deduction from $ 3500/yr to $ 2500/yr and eliminating the eligibility of over the counter drugs from coverage under FSA plans -RRB- , a $ 63 per employee per year fee assessed on group health insurance plans , the eventual employer mandate and individual mandate tax penalties for non-compliance , reductions in the amount of out of pocket medical expenses you can deduct from your personal income taxes -LRB- threshold increased from 7.5 % to 10 % of income to qualify for a deduction -RRB- , fees -LRB- insurance companies have to pay for the privilege of selling their products in the government marketplaces -RRB- , and $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over the next decade was shifted over to help fund Obamacare . This is not a total listing but hits many of the essential high points of where the money is supposed to be coming from .
Beginning in 2014 health care will be mandatory for every American . The PPACA , or better known to the public as Obamacare , will be implemented six months from now . The intent of the legislation is to provide health coverage for every American at an affordable price , supposedly lower than current premiums today . Most economists and some government agencies predict that Obamacare will cost much more to operate than previously thought and will impact the economy adversely . Keep in mind that this is a federal program . Any short fall of the program will be borne by federal income tax payers . Only 53 % of Americans pay federal income taxes . Taxes will increase or the U.S. debt will increase or both with the imposition of Obamacare .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Much Does Plan B Medicare Cost ?
The cost of plan B will vary depending on your age , gender , zip code , tobacco use , height and weight -LRB- some carriers use this -RRB- and the carrier you pick . Medicare Part B -LRB- if this is your question -RRB- is $ 105 per month for 2013 . Only a few carriers offer Medicare supplement plan B . It is not very popular .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and can help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- help seniors cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - a Medigap plan can pay all or a portion of the other 20 % , depending on which plan you have . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- with a Medigap plan will help you limit your out-of-pocket expenses and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Original Medicare will also accept your Medigap plan . There are 10 different Medigap plans and they are all standardized - meaning each plan type is exactly the same from every insurance company regardless of who you have your coverage through -LRB- the only difference being the price you pay for your Medigap plan -RRB- . The 10 Medigap plans are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . The benefits that can be secured under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans available to Medicare Beneficiaries . They include Plan A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N with Plan F also offering a high-deductible plan . The most popular standardized Medigap Plans are F , G , and N. Plan F will cover all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , co-insurance or deductibles for Medicare covered costs . If you choose the high-deductible Plan F , you must pay for Medicare covered costs up to the deductible amount of $ 2,140 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- before your Medigap Plan F will pay anything . Plan G will cover all your Medicare approved charges after you have satisfied the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Once the small deductible is met , Medigap Plan G acts like Plan F and covers the co-pays , co-insurance and deductibles that Original Medicare does not cover . Plan N covers 100 % of the Part B co-insurance , except for a small co-pay for some office visits -LRB- never more than $ 20 per visit -RRB- and up to a co-pay of $ 50 for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted as an inpatient -RRB- . You are also responsible for satisfying the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . If you have further questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is The Best Supplemental Insurance To Have With Medicare ?
The `` best '' supplement may be a different Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan for each plan -LRB- e.g. plan F may be most appropriate for person ABC and plan N may be most appropriate for person XYZ -RRB- as everyone has their own needs , budgets , and other factors . Plan F is the most comprehensive plan and creates the most predictable expense structure for an insured , however , it also features the highest premiums .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The short answer is that it depends on what you are looking for . Most Medicare Advantage plans have either $ 0 premium or very little premium per month . Everyone likes free or is it really free ? One of the biggest things to look for in a Medicare Advantage plan is the `` max out of pocket cost '' which can be as high as $ 6,700 per year . There is also a network so you would need to make sure you see doctors within that network . The benefits on the plan can change from year to year as well as the network itself . The best thing to do is to compare a Medicare Advantage plan and a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap plan -RRB- to determine what is best for you . A Medicare Supplement plan will have a monthly premium , however , the `` max out of pocket costs '' can be zero or close to it . There is also no network and the benefits ca n't change with a Medicare Supplement plan . A lot of people who have a Medicare Supplement plan like the idea of being able to budget monthly for the expense and not have to worry about a big medical bill coming unexpectedly . Contact an independent agent that specializes in Medicare plans and they will be able to review all your options with you .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : What is supplemental life insurance ? Supplemental life insurance can be extra insurance that you have above and beyond either your group plan at work or individually-purchased life insurance . If you purchased this and you need more , some people look at supplemental life insurance to augment what they already have . You may want to look at this in 2 ways '' ` Would I like to have more coverage or would I like to have a supplemental retirement income plan , an extra cash value contract , that can generate withdrawals to basis and policy loans to gain tax-free , as long as I keep the policy in force for the life of the policy insured ? ' If I 'm looking at it as a supplemental income play or I 'm looking at it as a supplemental death benefit , supplemental life insurance can be a great adjunct to what I already have , either by group or by my individual purchase .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
In addition to getting Medicare Part A and Medicare Part B in South Carolina , residents need to consider what type of Medicare Supplement Plan will be best for them . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is great health insurance . Some things to consider ... do you want the freedom to see any doctor you wish , without the need for a referral and benefits that do n't change from year to year ? A Medicare Supplement does all of these things and more . For more information about Medicare and to compare Medicare Supplement plans in South Carolina you can visit our website .
Are you referring to a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage plan , or a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan ? Your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- is provided by the federal government . You can apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan anytime during the year . You can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering yes/no health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check -RRB- if you 're outside your initial enrollment period -LRB- when you were new to Medicare Part B -RRB- and do not have a guarantee-issue right available to you . Medical underwriting for Medicare Supplement plans can be done in less than a week . There are no exams for these products . Please note , a common concern I hear a lot from individuals looking to replace their Medicare Supplement plans is they 're worried they 're at risk of losing the existing one if they apply for a new one and get declined . This is NOT true ! Even if you apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan and get declined , you can always keep the existing plan because Medicare Supplement plans are guaranteed renewable . If you 're looking to change your prescription drug plan provider or your Medicare Advantage plan provider , you can only make a change during certain times of the year . For the most part , you can only make changes during the annual enrollment period each year -LRB- between October 15 - December 7 -RRB- with changes becoming effective January 1 . Outside of this enrollment period , you can only make changes under certain situations -LRB- known as special enrollment periods -RRB- . An example of this is if you moved outside of the plan 's service area . For a full list of situations that qualify you for special enrollment periods to make changes , please visit the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Term Life Insurance Expire ?
I know of some folks who bought 5 year term and still are paying after 9 years to keep it . That is just silly because the rates go up to be ridiculous . The smart thing to do is to get another term policy if you can , at least for 5 years more , and hopefully convert it during that time to whole life where the rates never go up . You need to talk with a professional . Call please . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
Term life insurance policies do eventually expire . Some expire at the end of the term . Some become annually renewable term policies at the end of the term , then expire some years after that . Whether or not your term policy expires , the price usually becomes unaffordable at the end of the term you originally took out . It is better to convert your policy to permanent insurance before your term ends , if you have that option . With many term policies , converting them to permanent will allow you to lock in a premium for the rest of your life .
When you first purchased your term life insurance policy , one of the options you designated was the term length -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- in which the premium would remain locked in place for and could not increase . At the end of the designated term length premium guarantee period , the policy will do one of two things : 1 -RRB- the premiums will begin to increase each year by a substantial margin -LRB- based on age -RRB- 2 -RRB- the premiums will remain the same , but the death benefit will rapidly decrease -LRB- this method is only used on some term policies that are issued on a universal life chassis -RRB- What you will commonly see is the first method . For example , if you purchased a 20 year term policy and outlive the 20 year period , the premiums will start increasing in year 21 . Since the premiums will keep going up and up , most people replace the term policy with a new life insurance policy -LRB- term or permanent - depending on need and age -RRB- to create a new premium guarantee period . Note - the new policy will feature a higher rate structure -LRB- for the same coverage structure -RRB- as your older and due to any changes in health history - to accommodate this , you can adjust the face amount or length of coverage to reduce the premium of the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! Term life insurance is defined exactly by the name . The policy is active for the defined length of the term , at which point it expires , and your coverage ends . Most policies will state specifically the end date - 5,10 , 15 , or 20 years most commonly . The policies advertised so heavily by companies like AAA , AARP , and others will end the day you turn 80 . Sometimes that point is obscured by marketing or fine print , and many elders find out too late what they 'd purchased . The only other way your term policy will end is if you miss payments . Please check with a trustworthy agent before you purchase anything . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Most of the competitive individual term life policies these days provide for a guaranteed level premium period of between 10-30 years . At the end of the level period , if the coverage does n't terminate automatically , the premium usually increases so significantly , most policyholders do n't renew it . The coverage should be converted to a permanent policy before that time -LRB- while in the conversion period -RRB- or , if you are still insurable , work with a life insurance professional to find a new policy . Keep in mind that term eventually is not available due to age or insurability reasons . Buy permanent coverage as soon as possible to prevent your coverage terminating before you do .
It ends once the term is up . If it is a 15 year term , you are no longer covered after that time frame is up . The best thing to do is to purchase a permanent life policy at a young age although most people do n't always understand that . Most will see that permanent is more expensive than term initially , but never consider the fact that they will either have to convert that policy to a permanent policy or buy one later on both of which will cost substantially more than if the purchased a permanent policy in the first place . They often do n't consider that they may no longer be insurable and ca n't purchase a life policy due to some medical condition .
Term insurance will expire at some point in time as term policies are closed contracts which have a beginning and an end . With newer term policies the end comes between the ages of 90 to 95 . Many of the older term policies written end between the ages of 70 and 80 . If you have an older term policy , check to see when the policy ends and if there is a conversion option if you need coverage longer than you previously thought you would . As Jerry mentioned most term policies written currently have level premium periods of 5-30 years , but still have a life after in most cases . The cost after the level period expires will be much higher and increase every year after until the policy ends .
As long as you pay the required premium , the term life policy will not expire until the end of the term . Even at the end of the term , most term policies are renewable on annual basis . Term life policies are guaranteed level with many companies so be sure you look at the policy premiums for the term you are looking for .
All life insurance expires it is just a matter of when . Term life insurance is purchased by the expiration date . Term can be purchased by level premiums for 5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . Technically term life insurance will not expire on that date but the premiums will increase drastically in most cases ten fold and expire around age 80 or 85 . On permanent life insurance or cash value life insurance , the expiration is determined by the level of premium . On a whole life or universal life you have different levels of premium known as minimum , target and maximum . The target premium can be set for a certain age . Most common is age 95 or age 100 . There are several companies that will allow the target to be adjusted to an age range of 105 to 150 years old . Which it would be a miracle to live past age 150 , but if one did , the policy would expire .
Term life insurance policies do eventually expire . Some expire at the end of the term . Some become annually renewable term policies at the end of the term , then expire some years after that . Whether or not your term policy expires , the price usually becomes unaffordable at the end of the term you originally took out . It is better to convert your policy to permanent insurance before your term ends , if you have that option . With many term policies , converting them to permanent will allow you to lock in a premium for the rest of your life .
It generally does not expire at an exact age and most people wont keep a term policy past the term premium guarantee period . The premium guarantee period on a traditional term life insurance policy will last until your term period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 30 year term policy , the premium will remain fixed and guaranteed for 30 years -RRB- . When the term period expires , the policy changes to annual renewable term insurance and the premium will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- - this can generally be continued up to age 95 on most policies . However , the premiums that would be needed to continue the coverage will be SUBSTANTIALLY higher than what you were paying before and will only go up and up . Term policies on a UL chassis may keep the premiums the same past the term guarantee period , but rather than the premium increasing , the death benefit will decrease each year - can vary by company . Another type of term insurance is banded coverage - meaning premiums will increase every 5 years as you hit the next age bracket . These are generally term insurance to a specific age - generally up to either 80 or 90 . If you live past the designated max age , the coverage will cease immediately -LRB- if kept that long -RRB- - supplementing your term coverage with permanent coverage can be of great value .
Yes term insurance ends at a certain age as stated in the policy contract . The age that term policies expire has risen over the years . I have observed over that the age most term insurance policies expire is a couple of years before projected life expectancy . For example when life expectancy was 67 , policies expired at 65 , 76 then 75 , Now most expire at age 85 . Term policies do contain a conversion to permanent insurance before a specified date . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Term life insurance policies technically do n't expire until age 90 or 95 -LRB- with most carriers -RRB- . However , most people only keep a term life insurance policy until the term premium guarantee period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 20 year term policy , you 're likely only going to carry it until the end of that 20 year period -RRB- . When the term premium guarantee period expires , the policy structure will do one of two things : 1 -RRB- the premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- by substantial margins , or 2 -RRB- the premiums will remain the same and the death benefit will decrease each year . Many people often review their term insurance policies well before the term period expires because they may want to replace the policy with a new one to create a new term period to secure low rates while they 're young and healthy or change the amount of coverage they need to reduce their premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your term insurance coverage , including quotes and policy analysis and comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you have Term life insurance , the policy will expire when the term ends . So if you have 20 year term , the policy will expire at the end of year 20 . Either that , or it will jump up to a price that is unaffordable for most people . If Whole Life for which premiums have been paid on time and , if there there loans , the loans have been repaid with interest , the policy will not expire . It may endow , which means the cash value equals the face amount , allowing you to take the proceeds while alive . But it will not expire . Universal Life that has a no lapse guarantee is similar to Whole Life . Most Universal Life policies have a shorter guaranteed period after which they might expire . Usually , they last much longer per current interest rates . You would have to order a current illustration to find out how much time is left on your UL at both current and guaranteed interest rates .
Yes , a life insurance policy can expire . Some Term policies will expire at the end of the term , while others will go into years of annually renewable term -LRB- meaning the premium can go up every year -RRB- before the policy expires . Permanent insurance will not expire if it is set up to last until death at any age , and if all policy payments are on time with no unpaid loans . Some permanent life insurance policies are set up to expire at a certain time .
When your term life insurance expires , you may have the option to keep paying the premium to keep it in effect . But the price will be much higher than you were paying , and go up every year . Most people look for a new policy when their old term life insurance expires . The rate will most likely be higher than you paid before , because you are older . Your health will also be taken into account . Since you will be paying more , anyway , you may just want to bite the bullet and get at least some permanent insurance . The older you get , the harder it is to qualify for term . But if you want to get a new term policy and can qualify for it , that is what many people do . If you know that your term policy 's expiration date is coming up , you might want to look into converting some or all of your coverage to permanent life insurance -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . This just involves paperwork , no health questions and no exam . But it must be done before your policy expires and according to the conversion period set forth in your term policy .
The best life insurance is that which is in force at the death of the life insured . The issue is that term life insurance usually expires before the insured does . So , permanent forms of life insurance are preferred since they can not be outlived the way term usually does . In general , consider whether your protection needs are temporary or indefinite . Temporary or finite needs of less than 30 years can be met by term life insurance for periods such as 10 , 15 , 20 or 30 years . The coverage is surprisingly affordable -LRB- dollars per day -RRB- . When the policy expires , coverage ends . To prevent that , either consider permanent -LRB- cash value -RRB- life insurance now or in the near future to ensure you do not outlive your life insurance . Meet with a life insurance professional who can analyze your situation and recommend exactly what you need .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
When Term Life Insurance expires there may be a couple of choices . With some Term life insurance , the policy just ends . If you want a new policy you would have to apply for a new one . With other Term life insurance policies , you have the option to pay a new , much higher premium . This premium is usually annually renewable and can go up every year . Rather than let the policy expire and have to pay that premium , it would be a better idea to convert the Term policy to a Permanent policy , if that option exists . But converting Term to Permanent must occur before the Term policy expires , sometimes years prior to that time . Review your Term policy 's features to see when the conversion period ends .
Generally , when people ask about their life insurance expiring , they are referring to Term insurance . When the term of 10 , 15 , 20 , etc years is up , your policy may end , or you may choose to continue it at a much higher premium . Most people get a new Term policy when their current one expires . Sometimes Universal Life policies expire . Rather than having to start over , you can dump money into a UL to make it last longer . This does take a substantial amount of cash ; however , you can also reduce the face amount , as long as you are not already at the minimum face amount .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Is There A Deductible On Renters Insurance ?
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
There isnt a deductible if you are sued . When property is damaged as a result of a covered peril -LRB- fire , windstorm , etc. -RRB- the company will apply the stated deductible to the settlement of a claim . The purpose of the deductible is to reduce the number of claims by eliminating the small , inconsequential losses . In reducing the number of claims the cost of the insurance is reduced . The company usually will offer several deductibles to choose . You can tell by the premium change the effect that these smaller claims have on the cost of insurance . A deductible is much like self-insuring . It allows you , the policyholder to assume a portion of every loss in order to reduce the cost . The higher the deductible the closer you become to catastrophic insurance . As a principle , it is wise to assume as much of the risk yourself as you can reasonably afford to reap the benefit of a lower premium .
The property coverage portion of your renters insurance policy will have a deductible , yes . Upon settlement of a covered claim , that settlement will therefore be subject to that deductible as well as the other terms and conditions of your policy . Talk to your insurance professional about your coverage and settlement options .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
The IRS does not look favorably on any personal insurance deductions such as car , home , boat , jewlery or fine art insurance or rental insurance . However , Renter 's Insurance Can be tax deductible if you operate a business out of your home . In order to claim the renters insurance as a valid deduction you must allocate a certain percentage of your home as your office space and that portion theirof is tax deductible as part of eligible expenses . If you do not own a business , you can not deduct your renter 's insurance
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance can be purchased Online ! Renters Insurance is designed to protect tenants from financial loss due to damage or theft of Personal Property and protection from cases of Personal Liability . In order to obtain a quick and free quote for renters insurance , you will need to state the amount of personal property coverage you desire , the personal liability limit and the deductible for the policy . If shopping for the cheapest possible premium , you should request the minimum amount of personal contents coverage that is acceptable to you , the lowest limit of personal liability -LRB- $ 100,000 -RRB- and the highest available deductible . Once you have the rate quote , you can proceed with the purchase of your renters insurance policy . The link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States may be used directly by Consumers . WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
There are several deductibles available for damage to personal property . In a renters policy companies will often offer deductibles as low as $ 100 . The decision to select a low deductible should be based on your ability to sustain a small loss yourself . The larger the loss you can sustain yourself , the higher the deductible you should select . The higher the deductible you select the lower the cost of the renters policy .
The desire to have Renters Insurance is one that varies in different geographic areas ; the decision to purchase Renters Insurance is either due to sense of responsibility , the requirement by the Landlord or both ! The mostaffordable Renters Insurance in New Jersey is underwritten by Stillwater Insurance Group . Renters Insurance is a very valuable and inexpensive option to cover the tenant fromthe results of a Negligent Act ; this would be covered by the Personal Liability section of the policy , this part is also not subject to the deductible on the policy . In addition to the Personal Liability section , thepolicy will offer protection for Personal Contents against a number of perils including Fire , Theft , Water Damage and a number of additional perils listed on the specific policy . Coverage forms vary from State to State . There is an online method to obtain a quote and purchase renters insurance online directly in multiple States ; the following linkwill be very helpful : WEBSITELINK It is our recommendation to select the highest available Liability Limit , the sufficient amount of Personal Property and a high deductible ; these selections will produce ample coverage with a low premium rate . For additional questions and/or assistance not available on the automated process , we recommend contacting a licensed professional for guidance .
Renters Insurance covers the Personal Property of the Insured Tenant , offers Loss of Use for a covered hazard and provides Personal Liability for the Insured Tenant and resident family . The Renters Insurance Policy is commonly known as a Form HO4 and is available in all States . Renters Insurance is mandatory in a few States where the Government has been faced with an unusually high number of law suits thus inundating the legal system ; in other States , you will find some Landlords require tenants to purchase the insurance to provide a layer of protection for the possible negligent acts of a tenant causing property damage to the building , property of other tenants or inadvertent bodily injury to others . The possession of Renters Insurance is a display of genuine responsibility for one 's personal property and protection for others . Renters Insurance Online is available online in multiple States at the following link : WEBSITELINK In order to produce a lower premium , it is recommended only to purchase the minimum amount of Personal Contents coverage to sufficiently replace the personal property of the insured and to select a high deductible . This combination will generate a comparatively lower premium ; renters insurance is written for an annual term and is fairly inexpensive .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is An Average Cost For Renters Insurance ?
Great question ! The cost of your policy can vary based on a lot of things . The size and age of the apartment complex , what the crime rates are around it , and where it is located -LRB- City/state/zip code -RRB- as well as the size of your family and the estimated cost of your belongings . I 'd recommend going online for price comparisons , or contacting an agent who can help you find a policy for you . I 'd be happy to help if you need , feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Renters insurance cost varies from state to state and even zip code to zip code . In the State of Texas we are seeing an average of $ 20 per month . Some times less and some times more but I highly advise you getting this coverage . Most people do n't realize their renters insurance covers anything stolen from their vehicle that is not connected to the auto .
An Average person driving an average car living in an average neighborhood with an average driving record who wants average coverage 's and drives an average amount of miles and holds an average job with an average wife and average kids and an average income would surely pay an average price . However as an agent to be a little more specific I would need the answers to what is average .
The average cost of life insurance varies so much that it is impossible to state a meaningful figure . What is average for a 20 year old male is a far cry of what is average for an 80 year old male . Those two persons generally do n't even need the same face amounts or purchase the same type of policies . To find the average cost of Term Life Insurance for a relatively healthy person , you can use quote engines on websites that will show that . Better yet is to call the website or a local agency , and discuss your health and the type of policy you want . If they have several companies that will cover you with the same type of policy , that is a good way to see an average price of what life insurance would cost for you .
Renters insurance the first step you need to do is look at all your belonging tv clothes and personal items and look at what the replacement value is what it would cost if you lost everything and had to buy it all over again . Many do not realize of how much it would cost to replace most of our things since we have gather all that stuff over the years . Granted you ca n't put a price or a value on something such as photographs and things that your child made you but your other things can be quite costly to replace . The average renters contents to replace is30 to 40 thousand if you have to replace everything . As far as the cost of a policy goes the average 100 to 140 a year . Depending on your Liability limits . and if it is a full replacement cost for the coverage of your contents
The most recent figures for late March , 2014 indicate that the average cost of an individual major medical health insurance policy in the United States is $ 328 per month . That said , your results can and almost certainly will vary . A national average figure is not likely to be reflective of what the cost would be for you in the specific area of the state that you are a resident in . Also , this average figure does not take into account any possible advanced premium tax subsidy a person might qualify for , which would reduce that person 's net cost of insurance . Individual health insurance rates can vary wildly from one state to another and can vary significantly within the various regions that each state is subdivided into under the structure imposed by the Affordable Care Act . And the reported national average price becomes an even more unreliable yardstick because it also averages in a wide range of levels of insurance coverage . As an analogy , you can get an average cost for a new car purchase in the U.S. but that may bear little resemblance to the price of the specific car you want to buy .
The cost of life insurance increases with age . Obviously , the older we get the more likely we are to die , resulting in the life insurance company paying out a claim . In the words of George Lopez , `` Each Birthday is just another year closer to death '' or `` Studies have shown that the more birthdays you have the longer you live '' . The life insurance industry has amassed a large amount of data at what age people die and the cause of death . With a large enough population , they can predict accurately the average age of a man & woman at death , which helps them derive the cost of insurance based on the age of the insured . For example , in a 20-yr level term , they simply average out the cost of insurance for that 20 year span . For a permanent policy , they simply average the cost until the average age of death . So , all life insurance costs increase as we grow older . That is the reason why the premiums for insurance are much cheaper when we are younger . One last consideration ... because the cost of insurance increases , if you purchased a permanent -LRB- eg universal life , variable universal , etc -RRB- and paid only minimum premiums to keep the policy going , you may receive notification that you need to pay a large sum in premium to keep the insurance in force . This occurs when a policy is underfunded or in other words , the policy owner did not pay enough premiums in to the policy over time and it can not sustain the cost to pay out the death benefit .
The average rating people get for life insurance is Standard . From that , you can determine the average cost for persons of different ages . Keep in mind that the average cost for an 80 year old is going to be much different than the average cost for a 20 year old . As will the average cost for someone with diabetes as compared with someone with perfect health . The length of the term , or whether the policy is a permanent policy , have a great effect on the premium , as well . It is a good idea to go into a life insurance sale with your top dollar that you can spend , in mind . Then see if you can get a policy that suits your needs for a premium a little lower than that . Something is better than nothing , and by consulting with an honest and knowledgeable agent , most people can find coverage at a price they can afford .
Unlike what you see on television , insurance doesnt come in packages on the shelves of a store . Each renter is individually underwritten to meet the specific requirements of that renter . The average renter in my agency pays around $ 10 month for renters insurance . The company reports a slightly higher figure but neither figure bears any resemblance to what your premium might be .
In 2014 the national average cost of a Silver level plan -LRB- approximately 70 % coverage level and the most common plan design purchased -RRB- was $ 328 per month . This cost , in the overwhelming number of cases , will increase for 2015 plan year rates . As this is a national average figure and health insurance costs vary significantly from state to state , between regions within a state , and between different insurance carriers , it is only the roughest approximation of what health insurance might cost you . Your age and tobacco use status , plus the health insurance plan and insurance carrier you select are the primary factors in determining what your specific individual health insurance rates will be . Finally , whether or not you fall within the income ranges where you would qualify for some degree of an advanced premium tax subsidy will also factor into what your final monthly cost for individual health insurance would be .
The cost for renters insurance will be based in large part on the amount of coverage you desire . On average with 25,000 in personal property protection , 100,000 personal liability , 1000 guest medical and 12 months loss of use your looking at an average of 175-225 annual depending on the insurance company . It 's best in most cases to combine this coverage with your current auto insurance carrier for the maximum discounts on your renters policy and in most cases you will also receive an additional discount on your auto insurance . Discuss your needs with your local agent as there are sub limits you will need to be aware of in a renters policy .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
Renters insurance is about the same rate with all carriers . The average renters policy in Montana is bout $ 100 a year with $ 30,000 worth of contents and $ 100,000 in Liability limits with $ 5,000 in medical pay and a $ 500.00 deductible . Most carriers are between $ 10 to $ 15 a month . The only advantage in choosing some carriers is that if you already have an auto policy with the same carrier then it can lower your auto insurance . Example I have a client that has a carrier in our agency for her auto but they carrier does n't let agents sell the renters policy you can only get it online . But what she did was get the renters policy online for $ 100 a year but it lowered her car insurance $ 80 every 6 months hence it was almost like getting paid to have the renters insurance . I would talk to your local agent and see if they have any package deals since renters policies are so inexpensive but well worth the investment .
Because it 's not going to happen to them and it 's expensive . But the truth is the cost of the coverage is not nearly as expensive as the average cost of care and there is a pretty darned good chance they WILL need care . Roughly 70 % of people over 65 will need long term care services in their lifetime , 40 % of people currently receiving long term care services are aged 10-64 ! Average home health care expenses in Illinois average over $ 45,000 while a semi-private room averages around $ 70,000 , FAR more than the cost of the coverage to pay for it .
NO they can not force you to have renters insurance but they can choose to not rent to you if you do not get renters insurance . Most renters policies are on average $ 100 a year depending on your state that is with 40K worth of coverage on your contents and 100K in liability coverage . It is well worth the cost and in many cases if you bundle it with your auto insurance it lowers your auto insurance I have seen in many cases it lowered your auto insurance 10 a month and the renters insurance is less then 10 a month so this puts you ahead . Contact a local independent agent and they can help you muddle through what works best for you
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
As of July 2013 the average car insurance policy in the United States cost $ 964 per year . In Wisconsin the average policy cost $ 770 . So yes , on average , auto insurance appears to b cheaper in Wisconsin . Keep in mind that these are averages and your individual circumstances may result in higher or lower rates in Wisconsin .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
The average cost of life insurance in Oregon depends on many factors . One big factor is age . A $ 250,000 twenty year Term policy for a 30 year old male at the best health class averages about $ 200 per year . At age 50 , the average rate for that same policy is approximately $ 600 per year IF he still has excellent health . The length of the term is also a big factor . Shorter terms cost less , but as can be seen in the example above . locking in the premium for as long as possible is often a good idea . That is partly because health also greatly affects life insurance rates , and health is more apt to slip away as people age . To find the average life insurance cost in the state of Oregon for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes and test out some different face amounts and term lengths . Then give that agency a call so that you can be sure all your health details are taken into consideration . That will help you get a fair price .
end question
start question
annuities
What Are Annuities Paying Right Now ?
That is a complex question , if you defer payments even just a few years you can get an income rider that will pay out for your entire lifetime . Growth rates depend on whether it is a fixed annuity , or indexed , if it is lifetime payout , there is a table based on the age you begin distributions . Every year you defer income you get a larger % payout . Fixed annuities are paying 1-2 % , deferred indexed annuities can come with income riders of 4-10 % . Once distributions begin the income riders usually go away , but some products allow you to take income , while allowing the remaining funds to continue to grow . These new lifetime withdraws , are not Annuitizing , & allow any funds to be passed on to beneficiaries . Also many annuities now have a rider that doubles , or triples the account value , if you need to go into a nursing home . If your account value reaches zero , & you leave the nursing home . Your lifetime income continue at the same level as prior to going into the nursing home .
You know , there really is a right way to answer this question . I think the right way is to do whats best for you as the beneficiary . Life insurance is , after all , a care package from the insured to his loved one . It is a way of saying , I love you , and I take care of you now . Im going to make sure that an insurance company takes care of you later . This means that the golden rule is this : the quality of life you have now , is the quality of life you should have if you suffer the tragic loss of your spouse . If you are not making do with less now , you should not have to make do with less later . The money you need to pay your monthly bills now , is the amount of money you should have to pay your monthly bills later . The larger question is : for how long do you need this benefit to last ? For how long do you want to live off the insurance money ? There are a number of factors involved in that decision . First , and most important , is buying yourself the time needed to grieve and move on . Think about it . You have dedicated yourself to a life with someone . Now he is not there . And will not return . How long will it tell you to get back on your own two feet and renew your life ? Two years ? Five years ? Longer ? Then , what about your kids ? Theyve already lost one of their parents . Forever . They will need you more than ever . They will need you to spend as much time with them as possible . Can you afford to do this ? Life insurance can make sure the answer is yes .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Its very easy . Call up your life insurance carrier and ask them to walk you through the process . Of course , you should cover a few bases first to make sure that : Its the right decision , and Youre doing it the right way . How do you know its the right decision ? You know it is the right decision if you are absolutely , positively sure your beneficiary can do with less money . This is because the amount of the outstanding loan - plus interest - are deducted from the death benefit . If you take out a significant amount of money , that might short-change your beneficiaries . Then the whole purpose of the product would be defeated . To avoid this problem , reconsider any other sources of a loan . If you go ahead with the loan , reconsider other sources of cash for your beneficiaries to make up the difference . Now : are you doing it the right way ? Have the insurance company run an illustration showing the impact on your policy of taking out cash . Its not just a question of reducing the death benefit . It might also affect the guarantee period of your premium . Lets suppose you bought the policy intending to guarantee the coverage to 100 . Now suppose that taking out the loan would shorten the guarantee to age 85 . Not what you wanted , right ? You need to know this so you can design a strategy for paying back the cash . You might want to pay it back sooner than you had intended , so as to restore the original value of the of the product . These are some of the important bases to cover when you think about taking money out of your life insurance policy .
All great answers above ... . Yup ... the `` what , when , where , etc. '' is the key . ALSO ... how much coverage are you trying to buy ?? There are many `` guarantee issue '' plans out there -LRB- depending on age -RRB- . Some are instant coverage while others have a `` ramp up '' period before you get full coverage . `` Might be '' an option ... yet we don ; t know enough ab out you -LRB- age , sex , other history -RRB- . I once placed 5 policies in force for one dude ... he needed a specific amount for his divorce . The judge did n't care about the cost because of the underwriting mess he created . So ... 5 policies . He 's now down to 2 policies 3 years later . When I played high school basket ball , Air Jordan 's first arrived . EVERY KID wanted them . Yet , even way back then , they were SOOOO expensive -LRB- like your life rate will be right now -RRB- . Did I say , `` Screw you Jordan '' & go and play barefoot ? NO ... I bought `` what i could '' -LRB- OK . Dad bought what he could -RRB- & I played . I was still a starter . I still won a trophy at the tournament . Just like with your car insurance , the more time that passes , the less you 're penalized for the DUI . Each year you can assess your situation for a `` better value '' . Suggestion ... Do what you can right NOW & let time fix the rate issue .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
That is a great question ! The first step is to decide exactly what your retirement looks like to you . Do you want to travel ? Hole up somewhere and fish all day ? Live basically as you do now ? Once you 've done that , take a look at where you are financially right now . What are your assets ? What debts do you have ? How much longer do you anticipate working ? Then you can figure out how to get from where you are , to where you need to be to ensure your retirement looks like you want it to . The rule of thumb is to live at the standard that you are now , you will need to save between 8-10 times your current salary . If you are n't comfortable now , then you will need to save even more . A good advisor can help you find a way to get started , or to adjust the plans that you have . I hope that helps , thank you for asking !
Harry Crosby , a long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCI -RRB- agent , coach and trainer , has one of the best answers to this question that I know of . It 's called `` The Two Mistakes '' . In the interest of space , I have edited his take on this important question : There are really only two mistakes you can make with long-term care insurance . Mistake number one : You get one of these plans . It doesnt matter which one . You buy a plan , pay every year , live a long happy and healthy life , die in your sleep with a smile on your face and the money you paid in is gone . Right . The money you paid in is gone . Had you known that this would be the case , you would never have purchased a long-term carepolicy . Mistake number two : You stay self-insured , which is what you are doing right now . Then you -LRB- and possibly your spouse -RRB- need care . Not only do you pay for it yourself out-of-pocket , but the rest of the burden is placed on your family . Lets look at the two mistakes . Mistake number one is that you get this plan , and your premium is about $ 2,500 a year . You live another 30 years , and at age 85 you die in your sleep with a smile on your face never needing a day of care and thus never getting a dime out of the policy . You get to the pearly gates , they look at your file , and they laugh at you because you made a $ 75,000 mistake for having this policy and never needed it . By the way , that amount is less than one year of facility care in todays dollars . Now , mistake number two . You decide to not get this policy and pay the premium . Twenty years from now , when you are 75 , you need care for just two years . You pay for the care out-of-pocket . Based on past trends , the average cost of future care will be about $ 350,000 . If you have to make a mistake , which mistake has the least impact on your family : the first one or the second one ? That is why top financial advisors and the federal and state government encourage people like you and I to look into LTCI . It is just common sense .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
How about today ? There are many creative ways to fund your life insurance policy . Lets suppose you have term insurance with 10 years left on the premium guarantee . You could , of course , just keep paying the premium for those 10 years . If the carrier doesnt get those 10 years of premium payments , you will lose the coverage . Is there any way you could stop paying but still retain the guarantee ? Yes , there is . You might be able to use a single premium immediate annuity to fund the policy . Make one payment into the annuity , and the annuity will , in turn , pay your insurance premium for you . Depending on your age and other factors , the amount of money you put into that annuity could very well be substantially less than the total premium you would end up paying for the next 10 years . This way you could stop making premium payments after that one annuity contribution , but still retain your guaranteed coverage . Now lets suppose you have a universal life policy . I am sure you know that this is a flexible premium product . You could overpay , underpay , and even stop paying . Of course , you need to know what you are doing here to make sure you will have the coverage you need for as long as you need it . Given that , you might be able to plop one lump sum into that policy now and never have to make another payment and still get the guarantees you want . All you need is for the carrier to do a simple calculation and illustration for you . Here again , you could stop making payments but still retain the coverage . There are many ways to skin a cat , as they say . Not that I think cats should be skinned at all - but you know what I mean :-RRB-
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Right now - we are not seeing a huge impact . There is some back-end billing process changes , coding changes , payment changes - which actually went up by about 3 % . Right now - the Medicare Advantage plan and the Medicare Supplement are going strong and working pretty much as normal . However , in all the hoopla , there are some doctors not wanting to accept Medicare Advantage plans as a billing option . Which , in my opinion , seems strange because payments have gone up by the 3 % . I would love to hear the doctors side on this . I have not had any clients call with any huge concerns or shifts in coverage . Belinda www.myseniorventure.com/answers
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
You can always change insurance companies , there 's nothing to stop you . However , you may want to stick with what you have during a claim . Legally , an insurance company has to settle claims according to their policy whether you 're still insured with them or not . In practice , these are human beings working on your claim and they may not always give you consideration if you 've cancelled your coverage with them . Let 's look at an example . Let 's say you 've gotten into an accident and you 're car is in the body shop . You want OEM parts installed on your car , but the insurance company wants to use aftermarket parts because they cost less . They have more of an incentive to honor your request if you 're still insured with them because they see an opportunity to offset your claim with future premiums . Another factor to consider is the company you want to go to . They may not want to insure a car that has unrepaired damage . It 's totally up to the company . Now , in my experience , you would only ask the question if you do n't like how your claim is being handled . If you were totally satisfied , you would n't think about switching . My advice is to stay with your current company and negotiate with their claims department to get your claim settled to your satisfaction . Check your policy , all companies have an appeals process if you do n't agree with how your claim is being settled . Take advantage of it . You may get some consideration and a better settlement . If you 're still unsatisfied , you can always consider the courts , but this is a risky proposition unless you 're sure you 're in the right . After your claim is settled , you can explore new companies . A good agent will help you with claims if you 're not satisfied . They can not always ensure you 'll get what you want , but a good one will go to bat for you . In my opinion , finding the right advisor is the most important decision you make . In the long run , you 'll come out ahead even if they 're more expensive now . The cost of your coverage is n't just the premium , it 's what it costs you in time , money , and aggravation at claim time .
This depends on the type of Annuity . Deferred Fixed Annuities are up to 3.5 % for 5 years at the moment . Fixed Indexed Annuities have yearly caps up to 7 % right now . And Immediate Annuities have payout rates from 6 % up to 9 % . So it really just depends . You can always look online at websites such as fixedannuity4me.com to check for current up to date rates .
There are two basic types of annuities : single premium immediate annuities -LRB- SPIA -RRB- and tax deferred annuities . If youre financially conservative and looking for immediate income now , SPIAs are a consideration . If youre in a high tax bracket and youre looking at tax deferral feature of annuities , then you have three crediting methods to consider : interest rate crediting , indexed crediting and separate sub account crediting . You need to establish your risk tolerance to determine which crediting method is right for you .
Hey , it happens . Sometimes we make a mistake and end up in a situation we did n't intend . It does n't mean you ca n't get car insurance , it just changes the finances . Now , I can only speak for the State of Michigan , but I do n't imagine it 's very different in other states . When your insurance company finds out you got a DUI -LRB- and they will -RRB- , they will , most likely , cancel your policy as you 're no longer eligible to be covered under a standard company . There are , however , other nonstandard companies that will be happy to insure you , at a price . Companies such as Titan/Victoria , Progressive , Bristol West , and others will still insure you . Now , I 'm assuming you still have a valid license -LRB- If not , it 'll be more difficult -RRB- . It would n't surprise me if your premiums tripled or more with these companies but there are ways to help manage your costs . If you look at the quotes from these companies , you 'll probably see that more than half the premium is in the physical damage coverages -LRB- comprehensive and collision -RRB- . If you can live without these coverages , you can save a lot of money , but be aware that they will not fix your car if you have damage . Also , if your car is leased or financed , you 're bound by contract to carry these coverages . In this case , you can raise deductibles but it wo n't make a huge difference . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages , these are much more important . Now the bad news . You may not be eligible to be insured with a standard carrier for up to 5 years . And you thought the fines and court costs were high . This is where it really hurts . I hope you have a good agent , he/she is your best friend right now . Work with them and see what you can do to minimize your costs without sacrificing the most important coverages
Annuities are sold by life insurance companies , so there are probably over a thousand companies to choose from . A word of caution : ` variable ' annuities expose your money to risk . And guaranteed annuities have interest rates that are in line with the overall very low interest environment . So be wary of anyone promising returns of over 3 % right now as most guaranteed annuities are yielding 1.5 to 2.5 % depending on the size of your investment . But any whole percent is better than the small fraction of a percent that savings accounts and CDs are offering these days !
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can Health Insurance Be Denied For Pre Existing Condition ?
No and yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- anyone applying for major medical health insurance coverage after January 1 , 2014 can not be denied coverage for a pre-existing health condition . Insurance coverage is guaranteed to be issued and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately . However , this does require that you enroll for individual health insurance coverage during the mandated open enrollment period which for 2014 ended on March 31st . If you failed to enroll during the open enrollment period then you can not apply for major medical insurance coverage until the next open enrollment period which begins on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . The only exceptions to this part of the law are for what are referred to as `` Change of Life Status Events '' such as marriage , divorce , losing other health insurance coverage , or having or adopting a child -LRB- as the most common examples -RRB- . For the remainder of 2014 the only options available to persons who failed to enroll during the open enrollment period would be Short Term Medical insurance or perhaps a limited benefit/indemnity policy . However , these policies do still have some underwriting question associated with them that could result in your being declined for coverage . Also , these types of health plans do not cover pre-existing health conditions and do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for being major medical coverage . Therefore , you would be subject to the individual mandate tax penalty even if you do take out one of these types of policies .
No and yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- anyone applying for major medical health insurance coverage after January 1 , 2014 can not be denied coverage for a pre-existing health condition . Insurance coverage is guaranteed to be issued and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately . However , this does require that you enroll for individual health insurance coverage during the mandated open enrollment period which for 2014 ended on March 31st . If you failed to enroll during the open enrollment period then you can not apply for major medical insurance coverage until the next open enrollment period which begins on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . The only exceptions to this part of the law are for what are referred to as `` Change of Life Status Events '' such as marriage , divorce , losing other health insurance coverage , or having or adopting a child -LRB- as the most common examples -RRB- . For the remainder of 2014 the only options available to persons who failed to enroll during the open enrollment period would be Short Term Medical insurance or perhaps a limited benefit/indemnity policy . However , these policies do still have some underwriting question associated with them that could result in your being declined for coverage . Also , these types of health plans do not cover pre-existing health conditions and do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for being major medical coverage . Therefore , you would be subject to the individual mandate tax penalty even if you do take out one of these types of policies .
When you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older you will be in your initial Medicare Open Enrollment Period to purchase a Medicare Supplement . You have six month from when your Part B takes effect to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately with no waiting period . You can purchase a Medicare Supplement anytime you want to outside of your initial Open Enrollment Period but once your Open Enrollment Period ends you will have to answer all health questions to qualify for a Medicare Supplement . If you have a serious health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium to get the pre-existing health condition covered .
As of January 1 , 2014 all major medical insurance plans , both individual and group , can no longer have any exclusions , limitations or waiting periods for pre-existing health conditions . So , from that perspective it is not a matter of which health insurance accepts pre-existing conditions . Any health insurance plan in compliance with the Affordable Care Act has to . Now , there are Short Term Major Medical policies and some limited benefit and/or indemnity type policies out there that can still apply underwriting and can limit or exclude pre-existing conditions but these are not major medical health insurance plans that meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . In some instances people are marketing these types of products as a low cost alternative to ACA compliant health insurance plans . They provide you with some degree of financial protection but they will not shield you from the Individual Mandate tax penalty or provide you with comprehensive coverage . If you are offered a policy that does not cover pre-existing conditions that is a red flag that someone is trying to sell you a non-compliant policy - BUYER BEWARE .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
You can disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to Original Medicare from January 1 thru February 14 of each year . You will need to get a Medicare Supplement and Prescription Drug Plan . If you have serious health conditions you may not be qualify for a Medicare Supplement . Depending on the pre-existing condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium because of the pre-existing condition . It would be very important to talk with a qualified agent before you make your decision to disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan .
Any true major medical insurance policy , group or individual , should cover treatment for Lupus as it is an autoimmune disease in the same class as arthritis . Perhaps a person who was issued an individual health insurance policy that was grandfathered under the terms of the health care reform law was issued coverage excluding Lupus as a condition of issuing the coverage but that 's about the only context I can think of where this question could arise . Certainly in the era of health care reform , especially after January 1 , 2014 , coverage for conditions such as Lupus should not be a big point of discussion . No policy issued after that date can have pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . That being said , how treatment for conditions such as Lupus are handled from a level of coverage perspective can and do vary from one insurance carrier to the next . First of all , your perception of coverage may be affected by the type of policy you have enrolled in . If you enrolled in a policy with a $ 6000 deductible then your perception might be that your condition is n't being covered when actually it is but you are n't seeing any benefits until you 've met your deductible . In other cases your insurance carrier may have treatment protocols in place that guide your physician on the methods of treatment and types of medications that must be adhered to for treatment of such a condition and these may be a departure from your past experience and usage . If you are covered under a non-compliant health plan , possibly a limited benefit or indemnity type plan , then it is quite likely you would have little or no coverage for Lupus or be subject to pre-existing condition exclusions and/or waiting periods . Short Term Medical policies , which by nature do not cover pre-existing conditions , are also another possible area where a person could find that Lupus would not be covered . But , in today 's environment , a person suffering from Lupus can get major medical coverage that covers their condition .
Medicare Supplement plans can be changed anytime during the year . Just because you want to change your Medigap plan does not necessarily mean you can . When you are new to Medicare , after your Part B is activated , you have six months to enroll in any Medicare Supplement offered in your state with no health questions being asked , your acceptance is guaranteed . After your open enrollment periods ends you can apply for a Medicare Supplement later at any time but you must answer all of the health questions . If you have a serious pre-existing health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a substantially higher premium in order to get the pre-existing condition covered .
That is a great question ! One of the great things that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- did for us was remove the pre-existing condition exclusion . Health insurance companies can no longer deny you coverage because of your pre-existing condition , nor can they cap your life time expenses . When you go to enroll , head to the Healthcare marketplace , WEBSITELINK and see if you qualify for discounted insurance . A great many people do . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
It depends on the plan benefits . Effective 1/1/2014 private health insurance carriers can no longer deny applicants due to pre existing medical conditions , but that does n't mean the covered services fall under the benefit details . Make sure to verify your benefits before enrolling in a plan to make sure your pre existing condition -LRB- s -RRB- are covered appropriately .
Health insurance for pre-existing conditions is covered through the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- . When you purchase coverage through designated Open Enrollment periods , your pre-existing conditions are covered and you can not be denied for medical underwriting reasons . A licensed broker -LRB- preferably someone that has been in the business at least 20 years -RRB- can help you compare the best options and easily enroll .
Open Enrollment under Federal law when you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older , you have a guaranteed right to buy a Medicare Supplement policy for six months . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately . After your Open Enrollment period is over you can apply for a Medicare Supplement later at any time , but you may be charged a higher rate or be denied coverage if you have serious pre-existing health conditions . This may be your only chance to get a Medicare Supplement without having to go through medical underwriting .
Traditional Major Medical ? No ! Group medical ? No ! Short Term medical ? Yes ! Whether on or off-exchange , if you 're purchasing long term major medical health insurance -LSB- post 2014 -RSB- you can not be denied coverage due to pre existing medical conditions . However , many pre existing conditions will still be excluded from benefits , so make sure you are applying for a plan that suits your needs .
Unfortunately , the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may be denied coverage . If you are not in your initial Open Enrollment period or another Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Policy . Therefore , it 's best to get a Medigap Policy when you think you do n't need one . Often times people wait until a health condition arises because they think the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- will apply . With that said , each insurance company has unique health questions . One insurance company may deny rheumatoid arthritis while another is okay with it . In other words , do n't assume you will be denied . An independent agent can review your health history and let you know if you can apply for a Medigap policy .
Currently in most states you can be denied individual health insurance if your pre-existing conditions are severe or costly . As a result of Obamacare , most states do not have child only health insurance plans . In most cases you can not be denied employer group health insurance plan coverage . All this will change in 2014 when carriers can not deny you but expect premiums to be 2x current levels .
If you do have a pre-existing condition , it 's possible that that particular condition would be excluded . For example , if you have had several knee surgeries , it 's most likely that they 'd exclude your knee . Do n't forget that if you get denied for DI due to a pre-exisiting condition , you could still possibly receive critical illness insurance .
Private health insurance covers pre-existing conditions ... most of the time ! I 'll explain : When applying for coverage during Open Enrollment -LRB- assuming it is a qualified Exchange or Off-Exchange plan -RRB- , pre-existing conditions are covered and there will be no waiting period or surcharge applied . As an experienced health insurance broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , this issue is often discussed with customers and on our top-ranked websites . However , non-compliant plans , such as short-term policies , do not cover pre-existing conditions . If you miss Open Enrollment , these temporary plans are popular options .
That depends entirely upon what the pre-existing condition is and it 's likelihood of causing a person to become disabled . Something like common allergies would technically be a pre-existing condition but just because you may need allergy shots it is highly unlikely that such a condition would be an issue . Now , if you 've had a mild stroke and have a family history of heart disease then you are in a situation where qualifying for disability insurance would be much more difficult , if not impossible , in the individual market . Some disability insurance carriers will issue coverage that might exclude coverage if the disability is a result of the pre-existing condition . And some employer groups offer group disability coverage to their employees that may be guaranteed to be issued as least up to certain levels of financial coverage .
This will all change very soon as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 -LRB- PPACA aka Obamacare -RRB- takes effect , but for now this very much depends on if you allow your health insurance coverage to lapse . If you do not lapse coverage and begin private coverage , then usually a pre-existing condition would be covered . If you allowed coverage to lapse and then bought private insurance , it is possible for the insurer to excluse the pre-existing condition . Once PPACA takes effect , pre-existing conditions will no longer be allowed for the most part .
You can be denied Medigap coverage if you have serious pre-existing health conditions . Once your Part B Medicare coverage is activated at age 65 or older , you have six months to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . After your Open Enrollment Period ends you can enroll in a Medigap Plan at anytime , but you could pay a higher rate or be denied coverage for serious health problems .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Does Long Term Care Insurance Pay For Nursing Home ?
Yes , Long Term Care Insurance can pay for nursing home expenses , or for extended care offered by assisted living , or even in home services , in some situations . Long Term Care Insurance kicks in when the insured person meets certain triggers -LRB- inability to do two or more activities of daily living such as showering or dressing without assistance , cognitive impairment , and/or the care is ordered by a doctor -RRB- . Payments can go directly to the nursing home or place providing that care , or the payment can go to the insured person , who in turn pays the source of his/her care .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
You would need Long Term Care Insurance if you were no longer able to care for yourself and wanted to receive your care in your home or other location besides a nursing home . Medicare will pay for home health care or nursing home care if there is a need for skilled nursing services . If you need assistance with dressing and showering but do n't need IV 's , physical therapy , speech therapy , or other skilled nursing care , Medicare will not pay for in home services , adult day care , assisted living , or nursing home . Long Term Care insurance will pay for all those options if you are unable to perform 2 or 3 activities of daily living .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Medicare does not pay for Long Term Care needs such as a nursing home , assisted living or home healthcare . In order to get coverage for this you will need a Long Term Care policy . The cost of nursing homes keeps rising and currently can be $ 7,000 - $ 8,000 per month if you do n't have a Long Term Care plan . A independent agent that specializes in Medicare Supplement plans and Long Term Care plans will be able to save you a lot of time in designing the right Long Term Care plan for your needs .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Medicare Part A is , in short , your hospital insurance . It covers inpatient hospital care , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hopsice care , and home health services . Please note , there are limitations to what Medicare pays and for how long it will pay for given services . If you want to have adequate coverage for long-term care types of services -LRB- e.g. nursing home care , hospice care , and home services -RRB- , you will want to supplement your Medicare coverage with a separate long-term care policy . Medicare Part B is , in short , your physician insurance . This part of Medicare covers things like doctor visits , lab tests , surgeries , ambulance services , durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- , and other outpatient services . Medicare Part A & Part B are commonly referred to as Original Medicare and only covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of expenses . While 20 % does n't seem like it 's going to have a high dollar figure , the bill can add up quite fast . The idea of a Medigap plan is to create a predictable expense structure . If you do n't have a Medigap plan and visited the hospital/had a surgery/etc . , you 'll end up with a massive medical bill real quick . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare pays for the first 20 days of a * qualified stay in the nursing home , and then it will pay all but $ 152/day to day 100 . After day 100 , the only nursing home care that is paid is what would have been paid if the recipient is not in the nursing home . I.e. Drugs and durable medical equipment , doctor visits , hospital stays , and other qualified products and services . * To be a qualified stay , the patient must have been in the hospital for at least three days for the same condition for which they are going to the nursing home . The health condition must be medically determined to need skilled nursing care from a Medicare approved facility . Without these qualifiers , Medicare will not pay any part of the nursing home care , except that which they would have received if they not in a nursing home .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Medicare can provide some limited skilled nursing home care benefits . For days 1-20 , you pay $ 0 each benefit period . For days 21-100 , you pay $ 152 per day each benefit period . Days 101 + , you 're responsible for all costs . So , in short , Medicare will provide coverage for nursing care for up to 100 days . Medicaid can help pay nursing home expenses for Medicare beneficiaries . Medicare.gov provides a list of each specific covered service and eligibility conditions that need to be met for Medicare to cover nursing home care expenses . Long term care insurance is going to provide the greatest nursing home benefits .
Medicare can provide some limited skilled nursing home care benefits under Part A . During the first 20 days of a benefit period , you pay $ 0 . From days 21-100 , you pay $ 152 per day . Days 101 + , you 're responsible for all costs . Medicare.gov provides a list of each specific covered service and eligibility conditions that need to be met for Medicare to cover nursing home care expenses . Medicaid can help pay nursing home expenses for Medicare beneficiaries . Long term care insurance is going to provide the greatest nursing home benefits . These policies are designed for long-term stays -LRB- e.g. 3 , 4 , or 5 years -RRB- .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . In general , Part A is going to cover : 1 -RRB- Hospital care 2 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care 3 -RRB- Hospice care 4 -RRB- Home health services 5 -RRB- Nursing home care Please note , nursing home care and skilled nursing care benefits are generally limited and certain conditions need to be met to provide coverage . If you want to have protection in the event you need long-term care , then you should secure a long-term care insurance policy -LRB- especially while you 're healthy so you can medically qualify for the coverage - it is not guaranteed issue -RRB- . You can visit the Medicare.gov website for specific information regarding exact coverage figures or send me a private message if you have any questions .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- cover some part-time home health services such as physical therapy , skilled nursing care , speech-language pathology servcies , etc. . Medicare does not pay for 24 hour home health care however , nor meals delivered to your home , personal care , and homemaker services . Please note , there are a number of conditions that must be met for Medicare to cover your home health care . If you need more than part-time/intermittent home care , Medicare will not cover the expenses . Home health care is very expensive and you can deplete your savings paying for it . For someone wanting 24-hour home health care to be covered by their insurance , they should look into securing a long-term care insurance policy . While long-term care can be an expensive type of insurance to have , you 're paying pennies on the dollar if you needed to make a claim on the coverage . There 's many moving parts to long-term care insurance . If you 're looking to secure this type of coverage , it 's most helpful to consult with an experienced broker to help build a policy that will best serve your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Get Life Insurance On Your Children ?
Getting life insurance on your children is a way of ensuring that they can have life insurance when they are adults . While many health conditions are being rated more favorably by life insurance companies due to improvements in medical treatments , I also see fewer and fewer choices for young people with serious health conditions . Purchasing life insurance on your children while they are healthy is a simple and inexpensive way to give them the security of life insurance for the rest of their lives . Whether you get them Whole Life , Term insurance that they can convert to permanent insurance later on , or just put them on a child rider that they can change to 5 times that amount in permanent insurance when they become an adult , each option provides this chance to have life insurance for life even if a health condition has developed along the way .
The only way to answer this is to look at your situation and determine why you should consider having Life Insurance . Here are some examples why you would consider having a Life Insurance . you are married . A life policy would pay off any expenses and help to maintain the standard of living you currently have or perhaps want to provide the means to improve the living standard . you have children . This is a common reason . Have coverage to support your spouse until the kids move out . Perhaps you want to make sure the children have the means to go to college if you were to die prematurely . your a partner owning a business . Life Insurance is used for Key Person & Buy-Sell agreements . Key Person pays the company for lost income if a Key -LRB- important -RRB- employee passes while the company looks for someone to replace you . Buy-Sell purchases the ownership of your partners half that would otherwise fall to the family , surviving spouse . you have a bank loan . Sometimes , depending on the structure of a loan , you might be required to have Life Insurance which would pay the loan back upon your untimely death . This is one way a bank may minimize the risk on the loan defaulting . There are just 4 examples which are common . There are many other situations where it is good to have Life Insurance . Contact your agent/broker to discuss your situation .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
I am actually working on these policies right now for a few clients . They are choosing an amount they want to spend per year , and committing that to a policy for their children . The basic objective is to accumulate an attractive amount of money that could then be distributed as supplemental retirement income later on in the kids lives . Since this money will grow over literally decades , enough can be grown so that the yearly income can be substantial . We are kind of backing into the face amount once we decide on the yearly contribution and on how much money we would like to let the children take out of the policy when the time is right . So , like anything else , you get what you pay for it . You can go high or low on the funding , and high or low on the face amount . It all depends on what role you want life insurance to play in wealth accumulation for your children . Why not go for it ?!
Does your child need life insurance ? Well there will be an answer for everybody and they may not be the same . I purchased life insurance on my children . Here are a few reasons why ... . if one of my children were to die , I do n't think I would be able to go straight back to work on Monday as if nothing happened . I would n't want to have the price of the headstone and service costs get into the pain my wife and I would be experiencing . Imagine telling your wife `` that costs too much '' for the headstone she wants for your child . I also bought for positive reasons too . I purchased whole life so they have permanent insurance working hard at a low cost for them . They have solid cash values and life insurance to take into adulthood .
That is a great question ! I can give you three reasons why it makes sense to have life insurance on your child . The first is that unfortunately , children die also . Unless you have the money to cover funeral costs , a very inexpensive policy can be a financial lifesaver . The second is that children can often develop health issues that would prevent , or make prohibitively expensive , getting a policy . Anything that leaves the child requiring home health care is enough to get them declined by many companies . The third is for financial security . Many companies will allow the increasing of the face value at points along the child 's life , and there is a cash value that grows along with the child . The right policy can ensure a good chunk of change is available if needed one day . I have policies on my kids , if that helps . If you would like to discuss this more , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
The reason you are required to have insurance is because in the event of you causing injury or damage to someone else . Your insurance pays for that . Now there is such a thing as self insured which means you can afford to pay for all damages yourself . but the thought can be quite frightful , Example you plow into a school bus full of children because your tire blew and you killed a bunch of children would you be willing to risk everything you own to pay for the damages ? That is why you have insurance is to cover damages to others . On the flip side that also covers you if you have un insured and under insured coverage 's so that if someone hit you and has no insurance then your medical bills are covered also
Here are just a few reasons why you need life insurance : You own a home with your partner and have a mortgage . What will happen if you die prematurely and your partner can not afford to make the mortgage payments ? You have student loans , credit card debt or any type of debt . You have children who depend on your future income for daily living expenses and education . Funeral and burial expenses Your family would lose a loved one and have to deal with the pain of the loss . Why leave additional stress and the financial burden on family members to pay off outstanding debts .
There are different views as to what the best life insurance is for children . If you have more than one minor child , getting a child rider on the parent 's policy is a very low price way of covering your children . If they develop a health condition , they will be able to convert their policy to a permanent policy of approx 5 times the value of the rider when they become an adult . If they stay healthy , they can purchase a permanent policy on their own , at a competitive price , when they become adults . Some parents prefer to purchase permanent policies for their children while they are young , and then give them that policy , all paid up , when they become adults . Either way , getting life insurance on your children ensures that they will be able to have affordable coverage as adults , in addition to providing protection if there was a tragedy while they are young .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Trampolines are an attractive nuisance not unlike the pond on the back forty , They are the source of a lot of additional liability exposure to the policy and the homeowner . The biggest reason that liability increases is because more than one child or person is one the equipment at a time . Most families with a trampoline have n't established risk-based rules for use and enjoyment and so what looks to be a fun and exciting play thing , becomes a hazard teeming with potential to cause great bodily harm . Insurance companies know from experience that trampolines cause losses and are expensive to insure because the injuries can become catastrophic . Broken bones are one thing . A broken neck with paralysis is completely another but well within the outcomes on a trampoline . Add to the trampoline an almost complete lack of training or instruction on the correct methods of use -LRB- and the lack of appropriate rules for use -RRB- , and we find the trampoline becomes similar to a loaded gun just waiting for curious hands with just as much potential to destroy a healthful life . Another issue that crops us is the degradation of the platform fabric since it is exposed to weather and sunlight . People have been known to bust through the platform because it became degraded due to the sun and weather effects . Bones get broke hitting the found and frame members below the deck . In my experience , most companies do n't want anything to do with insuring a home with a trampoline . A relative few do n't charge additional premium and do n't restrict the presence of a trampoline . Others still will permit a trampoline when it is is present for coverage at an additional charge . One carrier we represent charges an additional $ 75 annually for the trampoline , requires the fences to be installed -LRB- most trampolines come with them -RRB- , and they wo n't provide insurance on the home unless the trampoline is also included in coverage . All in all , you do n't simply have the choice to not insure the trampoline since the mere act of having one dramatically increases the chances of having a loss ! That said , trampolines can be enjoyed safely but it requires careful and near constant monitoring by the responsible adults , the establishment of rules for use , the ability to protect the equipment from non-invited use by neighbors when the owner or their children are not using the equipment , and inspection periodically for signs of degradation and normal wear and tear . Additionally , basic skills should be discussed , taught and understood , limits should be placed on the behavior that is allowed on the trampoline , and responsible adults should be willing to stop all play when careful control can not be maintained . Many injuries occur when the parents are not paying attention or aware from the home . Let 's face it , no one wants to be sued for the liability that may arise out of an injury on a trampoline and no one wants to deal with the often catastrophic injuries that can occur to your children or the neighbors . These latter comments and insight are a good foundation for understanding why an insurance company does n't like trampolines and why homeowner insurance is often negatively influenced when they are present on the property .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
Purchasing life insurance on children can be a long term savings account or preemptively purchasing life insurance for insurability later in life . Some parents insure their children for final expense in case something happen to them . But be advised , most life insurance companies require parents to have life insurance before they can purchase life insurance on their children .
Statistically , nearly everyone will at some point need some type of care in their lifetime . As we get older our health declines . We are unable to do things for ourselves . The cost can be tremendous . Nursing Home average cost is between $ 6000 and $ 7000 . Cost for Assisted Living runs around $ 4000 . Home Health Care runs between $ 15 and $ 20 per hour . Medicare is very limited on what they will pay and does not pay for custodial care . The options , the family can try to care for the loved one . While many families try to take care of their loved one at home , the burden can be great , especially if the family has children in addition to caring for a loved one . Very often the situation is so bad it becomes nearly impossible without help . You can private pay for help either at home or a care facility , but it does n't take a mathematician to figure out that any assets would be rapidly depleted leading to the final option , go on Medicaid . Long Term Care provides funds to pay for care without having to lose everything you have worked hard to provide and the legacy you wanted to leave behind for your children and grandchildren . It relieves the burden and embarassment of having our personal needs taken care of by family members . Anyone who has ever been a caregiver knows how hard it can be . Why buy Long Term Care Insurance ? Because you love your family !
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
Why would you need life insurance ? The best person to ask that question to is your spouse . Your children . Your church . Your business partner . Your employer or employees . Your lender . Life insurance is for those who are left behind . If a person 's passing would not cause a financial hardship for anyone , if all their debts were paid and they had left all to charity that they desired , they would not need life insurance . What I have found is , it is often a matter of perspective . Ask those who matter to you , and you will get your best answer .
People take out life insurance to ensure that their survivors will be taken care of financially . Those who get life insurance know that life insurance is not only a means of survival , it is a love letter to those left behind . Life insurance can do everything from feeding small children left fatherless by a car accident , to affording an elderly widow the luxury of someone making him a home cooked meal three times a week . That is why people take out life insurance , among many other reasons .
There are two main reasons to purchase child life insurance . The first is to insure against the unthinkable tragedy of losing your child early to cover the cost of final expense . The second is to protect the child 's insurability should they develop a disease or disorder such as Type I diabetes or cancer which would be difficult to purchase life insurance . Permanent plans like whole life and universal life insurance protect insurability and allow cash accumulation for that can be used for college funds , a new house or even a retirement plan . Adding a child life rider to an adult term life or permanent life insurance plan is a very affordable way to insure children , especially multiple children for one low rate will cover all children and allow for guaranteed conversions in case they should lose their insurability .
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What 3 Questions Does AARP Ask For Life Insurance ?
At this time , AARP 's three health questions for their term insurance are : 1 . In the past 2 years , have you had treatment or medication for or been diagnosed by a doctor as having heart trouble , stroke , cancer , lung disease or disorder , diabetes , liver or kidney disease , AIDS , AIDS Related Complex , or immune system disorder ? 2 . In the past 2 years , for any condition , have you been admitted to or confined in a hospital , sanitarium , nursing home , extended care or special treatment facility ? 3 . In the past 3 months , have you consulted a doctor or had treatment , medication or diagnostic tests of any type ? -LRB- Note : You are not required to report negative AIDS or HIV tests -RRB- .
What 3 questions does AARP ask for life insurance ? I guess the answer to this question would best be found on AARP 's website for life insurance . I think it might be more important to look at the insurance offered with those 3 questions . Currently it is a group policy offered through New York Life . NYL is a fine company so no worries there . This plan is a 5 year level term policy , which means every five years the cost will increase . The policy ends at age 80 , with nothing to convert over to . So if you need coverage beyond age 80 , you will be shopping again . Pricing wise , because of the few questions asked , the price tends to be high . This would be true of any insurance company that asks only a few questions . What you do n't ask about , you charge for . So a healthy person could do much better elsewhere , but for the person who wants to go this route and does n't mind the extra cost and the early ending , it 's fine .
The AARP branded life insurance is actually New York Life . They just pay for the AARP branding . They go all the way to guaranteed issue so the only three questions on that are going to be 1 . What is your age ? 2 . What is your gender ? 3 . How much coverage do you want ? Anyone considering this policy would be well advised to keep looking . It 's probably the worst deal you can get . Most people can get a much lower premium and first day full coverage rather than accept the terms of a guaranteed issue policy . AARP often tries to sneak into the fine print `` Premiums are not guaranteed . You can not be singled out for a rate increase but we can increase them on all insureds . '' That is completely unacceptable . New York Life is wise to pay AARP to use their name to sell this . No one who reads it would ever accept that deal . But some AARP members trust the brand name so much they do n't read it .
AARP has a number of policies , so the questions asked depend on which policy you are apply for . But one that has three health questions is AARP 's term policy , which Larry described . Here are those questions at this point in time : 1 . In the past 2 years , have you had treatment or medication for or been diagnosed by a doctor as having heart trouble , stroke , cancer , lung disease or disorder , diabetes , liver or kidney disease , AIDS , AIDS Related Complex , or immune system disorder ? 2 . In the past 2 years , for any condition , have you been admitted to or confined in a hospital , sanitarium , nursing home , extended care or special treatment facility ? 3 . In the past 3 months , have you consulted a doctor or had treatment , medication or diagnostic tests of any type ? -LRB- Note : You are not required to report negative AIDS or HIV tests -RRB- .
What 3 questions does AARP ask for life insurance ? I guess the answer to this question would best be found on AARP 's website for life insurance . I think it might be more important to look at the insurance offered with those 3 questions . Currently it is a group policy offered through New York Life . NYL is a fine company so no worries there . This plan is a 5 year level term policy , which means every five years the cost will increase . The policy ends at age 80 , with nothing to convert over to . So if you need coverage beyond age 80 , you will be shopping again . Pricing wise , because of the few questions asked , the price tends to be high . This would be true of any insurance company that asks only a few questions . What you do n't ask about , you charge for . So a healthy person could do much better elsewhere , but for the person who wants to go this route and does n't mind the extra cost and the early ending , it 's fine .
AARP has a number of policies , so the questions asked depend on which policy you are apply for . But one that has three health questions is AARP 's term policy , which Larry described . Here are those questions at this point in time : 1 . In the past 2 years , have you had treatment or medication for or been diagnosed by a doctor as having heart trouble , stroke , cancer , lung disease or disorder , diabetes , liver or kidney disease , AIDS , AIDS Related Complex , or immune system disorder ? 2 . In the past 2 years , for any condition , have you been admitted to or confined in a hospital , sanitarium , nursing home , extended care or special treatment facility ? 3 . In the past 3 months , have you consulted a doctor or had treatment , medication or diagnostic tests of any type ? -LRB- Note : You are not required to report negative AIDS or HIV tests -RRB- .
The AARP branded life insurance is actually New York Life . They just pay for the AARP branding . They go all the way to guaranteed issue so the only three questions on that are going to be 1 . What is your age ? 2 . What is your gender ? 3 . How much coverage do you want ? Anyone considering this policy would be well advised to keep looking . It 's probably the worst deal you can get . Most people can get a much lower premium and first day full coverage rather than accept the terms of a guaranteed issue policy . AARP often tries to sneak into the fine print `` Premiums are not guaranteed . You can not be singled out for a rate increase but we can increase them on all insureds . '' That is completely unacceptable . New York Life is wise to pay AARP to use their name to sell this . No one who reads it would ever accept that deal . But some AARP members trust the brand name so much they do n't read it .
AARP is not an insurance company . They are an organization that sells the use of their name and logo to insurance companies . The fine print on the insurance products actually says that the AARP organization does not recommend or endorse the AARP branded insurance products . The insurance products with the AARP logo are often not a great value . But that logo does work because many seniors think of it as a type of Consumer Reports for seniors . It is not . If you study the offerings of the insurance products that use the AARP brand , they do not always compare well . The life insurance with the AARP brand often says that they do not guarantee rates . That is a very important feature that most seniors want and can all easily find with most life insurance products that are marketed to seniors . The Medicare Supplements AARP/United Healthcare are exactly the same plan as offered by many other companies but in many states you will pay less if you shop other brands besides the AARP branded one . Your search should be for good health insurance . Not for a Health insurance company that pays for an AARP logo on their brochure .
A Medigap Plan purchased through AARP means you will have Medicare Supplement insurance through United Healthcare . Medigap Plans A , B , C , F , K , L and N are sold by AARP . In some states , AARP has Medigap SELECT plans . For example , if you have Medigap SELECT Plan F or C , you get all the benefits of those plans -- except you have to use the hospitals in the network directory to receive full hospital care benefits . Applicants must be AARP members or live in the same household and share the same AARP membership number . It 's important to note that Medigap Plan benefits are standardized ; so , Plan F with AARP is the same Plan F with another insurance company . The difference is the price . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can help you compare an AARP premium to other insurance companies . Many people like to do their own research and sometimes will end up with an insurance company such as AARP because it 's easy to call up and enroll . However , this ` easy ' process can often times equate to a higher premium . By working with an independent agent , you can compare an AARP premium to other insurance company premiums for the same Medigap Plan you desire . This will make sure you are getting the best priced Medigap Plan . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
AARP , the American Association for Retired Persons , is a lobbying group tied to a marketing organization . AARP does not write insurance , but does `` endorse '' certain insurance products in exchange for a kick back or other form of compensation . It is unwise to assume any insurance product endorsed by an association is always a good deal . When I have compared plans recommended by AARP vs. what the consumer can purchase on the open market through an independent agent , I rarely find the AARP endorsed plans to be of good value .
AARP is not an insurance company , However The Hartford offers discounts to AARP members on both home and auto insurance . The Hartford has been in business for over 200 years and is a highly reputable insurance company . Just to note : not all Hartford agents are authorized to offer AARP discounts . AARP qualified agents must go though certain training and be approved before being able to offer The Hartford 's AARP product . You should easily be able to do a web search to find a local agent who can offer Hartford 's AARP product . I myself am an AARP authorized agent in the state of California .
No , AARP is a marketing organization aimed at seniors and only endorses health insurnance but does not offer health insurance coverage . In my area AARP endorses United Health One which not always has the lowest premium . One might ask why AARP endorses a certain product . It is because the company pays for that endorsement as they pay for advertising or any other marketing method . The consumer must always shop the carriers and the plans to get what best fits him or her . AARP will always mislead the consumer to believe that the product or servce is absolutely the best in price and value which may not be true . Do n't believe it all . Shop !!
AARP Medigap plans are Medigap plans insured through United Healthcare . In short , AARP partnered with United Healthcare to attach their name to UHC 's products . As Medigap plans feature standardized benefits , the coverage under each Medigap plan is exactly the same as it would be if you purchased the coverage from another carrier . The main way the AARP Medigap plans differentiates themselves from other Medigap carriers is through their premium rating method . Most carriers determine their rates based on the attained-age rating method -LRB- your age at the time you apply with rates increasing as you get older each year -RRB- . AARP Medigap plans -LRB- insured through United Healthcare -RRB- are based on the community-rated method -LRB- everyone in an area pays the same rates regardless of their age - meaning an 85 year old is paying the same thing as a 75 year old -RRB- . Please note , the carrier also offers value-added services such as discounts for certain things such as eye exams and also offer a 24/7 nurse hotline , and silversneakers membership . You must be an AARP member to buy an AARP Medigap plan - membership can be attained during the application process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and comparison and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Keep in mind AARP is not an insurance company . New Your Life pays for the endorsement and the right to market under the AARP banner . Just because a policy is offered under the AARP name does not `` necessarily '' guarantee a better rate than you can get elsewhere . AARP is a good organization and New York Life is a good company , all I am saying is shop and know what you are buying . Whenever you buy something over the TV or in the mail you risk getting hurt because it is very easy to be confused by some of the advertising that is done . Having a good local agent is almost always the best choice .
In Georgia , Medicare supplement plans from AARP are generally lower than Blue Cross but higher than Mutual of Omaha and several other carriers . This is especially true if you purchase your AARP Medigap plan at age 66 or later . When given a choice in plan F vs plan G , most consumers will buy plan G , but they wo n't buy it from AARP . AARP does not offer plan G .
There are three types of policies you can get through AARP . The term policy has the lowest rates , and asks for a full health history . The permanent policy asks three questions , with multiple parts to the questions . And the guaranteed acceptance policy does not ask any health questions at all .
Yes . AARP offers at least two different types of life insurance . One type they have is a term life insurance policy that they sell to people age 50 or older . The rates increase every 5-years on that one . When you have a birthday that ends with a 0 or a 5 you will have a rate increase . -LRB- age 55 , 60 , 65 , etc. -RRB- if you live to your 80th birthday your AARP term policy terminates . You can then buy their other policy but the rates are much higher and are still not guaranteed against future increases . Another type policy AARP has sold for many years . It is a universal life policy where the rates are not scheduled to increase but it still has no guarantee against rate increases . They have sold this for many years . More recently they have introduced a whole life policy that does offer a guarantee against rate increases . It may not be available in all states yet . AARP is not actually an insurance company . They just market the policies for New York Life .
AARP Medicare Supplement Plans are insured by United Healthcare . United Healthcare pays a royalty fee to AARP to have them sponsor their Medicare Supplement plans and that is why you must be a member of AARP in order to apply for one of their Supplements . AARP sponsors the plan they are not providing the insurance coverage or paying the claims . After the Medicare Supplement has been issued and in benefit you do do have to renew your AARP membership if you choose not to in order to keep your Supplement .
AARP no longer provides long-term care insurance . Genworth withdrew its `` affinity marketing agreement '' to accept applications for a special plan of LTCi designed for the AARP members , effective June 1 of this year . Genworth will continue serving policyowners that have previously purchased the Genworth AARP contract and will , of course , pay all legitimate claims . AARP reported that they are not looking for a new carrier to take Genworth 's place at this time , but would be acceptable to negotiating with any LTCi carrier that might come forward with a proposal . The largest and perhaps most vocal advocate for those over 50 in the US , and a major source of educational material on health-related issues for seniors , AARP said that they will continue to provide information about long-term care planning and the roll long-term care insurance might play in such planning .
Bob has good information but I will add that in many states the United Healthcare Plan -LRB- AARP -RRB- has a built in rate increase the first 10-years . This is in addition to the attained age rate increase that is already built in . The way they do that is they call it a `` discount . '' The discount is for age 65 applicants but even with the full discount the premium is not cheaper than other companies . But then they take a pro-rated amount of the discount away each year for 10-years . So in reality , it was n't really a discount but a built-in additional price increase that they never have to claim as a price increase . Regardless of what you think of the AARP organization , when it comes to their name on ANY insurance product , use the same caution that you would with any other company . The insurance companies just buy the use of the AARP name and logo . It does n't mean the product is a good value or a bad one . But it does catch some seniors off guard .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Disability Insurance Worth The Cost ?
Disability Insurance protects your income . The average American becomes disabled once during their working years . That average time of disability is 30 months . Most Americans have 90 days of emergency money . Depending on your gender , age , smoking status and health condition you could pay 5-8 % of your income to protect your income . 60 % of your compensation tax free -LRB- because you didnt deduct the premiums -RRB- and 80 % of your compensation taxable because you deducted the premium through a business . Is that worth it ?
Insurance ... . be it Disability Insurance or Long Term Care Insurance or Life Insurance or whatever type of insurance that you buy ... . is not really worth the money put into it unless you need it . But if you do need it , it is beyond worth it . Also , the peace of mind that having insurance gives has a value . So Aflac Disability Insurance is worth it if you become disabled . And if you do n't , it may be worth it to you to not have had to worry about the possibility of being without an income for any significant length of time .
Long term care insurance is not worth the cost if it causes you to cut back on groceries or medication or other essentials needed for a healthy and happy life . If you have very little savings , assets or investments , long term care insurance may also not be worth the cost . If you can afford it , you might want to buy long term care insurance for the options it offers you for your care . However , you would not need it to protect your assets if you do not have assets to protect . Long term care insurance IS worth the cost for those who have a lot to lose if they would have to pay expensive nursing home , assisted living , in home , or other care costs for an extended period of time . It also is worth the cost for those who have strong feelings about being able to pay for the type of care they want , rather than rely on where Medicaid allows .
Is Supplemental Disability Insurance worth it ? That is a great question . If you need almost all your income to support your family 's lifestyle and home , then it certainly could be worth it for you . Group Disability Insurance can end up paying you only 45 % of your income , after taxes , and has restrictive features that a Supplemental Disability Insurance policy will expand upon . Also , Supplemental Disability Insurance can bump the amount you would get paid during a disability to 70 % to 80 % of your income . Finally , Supplemental Disability Insurance is generally portable whereas group DI policies generally are not portable . So purchasing Supplemental Life Insurance while you are still insurable can ensure having Disability coverage for the rest of your life .
Is disability insurance worth having ? The answer depends on the individual . What we 're talking about with disability insurance is paycheck protection . Disability insurance does n't pay for a medical claim , at least not directly . Disability insurance simply creates a pot of money to use as you would with your paycheck . It is up to the individual to decide the worth of protecting their paycheck . Maybe if there 's passive income or massive savings the need for disability insurance may not be that great . But , if you 're not in that position financially , you should think long and hard about disability insurance .
That depends on how long you could live without your paycheck . Long term disability insurance is designed to replace a portion of your income if you were to become sick or injured and could no longer work . Consider how much your ability to make an income is worth . If you make $ 50,000 per year and assuming you never got another raise and were planning on working for 30 more years , your income would be worth $ 1,500,000 -LRB- $ 50,000 X 30 -RRB- . This about it this way ... if your car is worth $ 15,000 and lets assume you pay $ 100 per month for car insurance . If your income is worth $ 1,500,000 , does n't it make sense to pay $ 100 per month for a long term disability policy to protect that ?
Is Life Insurance really worth it ? That depends entirely on the individual involved . For some the idea of protecting their family if they do n't make it home some night is worth a great deal . For others not so much , as it depends on your relationships in life . Even as single young man , I bought life insurance . Why ? cause it was `` worth '' it to me to make sure that my mom could deal with the clean up of the mess I left behind without having to spend the money she worked hard for herself . It was `` worth '' it to me to make a terrible situation that my mom might have to face not a financial hardship at the same time . Later on , it was `` worth '' it to me to have coverage for my wife and kids . This is really a personal answer for each person . I ca n't tell anybody why it 's worth it to them , that has to be their own choice .
`` Worth '' having something really is based upon one 's own point of view and circumstances . As an insurance professional who is responsible for providing advice and service to my clients , frankly I believe that dollar for dollar , Renters Insurancecan be invaluable and is certainly `` worth '' the cost . Look , you work hard to obtain the things you buy , so obviously , you have already made the decision that these things are `` worth '' having . If you came home one day and your apartment or the house you were renting was completey destroyed and all those personal items that you valued were gone , I suspect you would not be questionning the worth of your renters ' policy .
The average cost for an individual Long Term Disability policy is about 1 % to 3 % of your annual salary . The more bells and whistles you add onto your policy , the higher it will cost . Some features , like residual and own occupation , are worth it . Others , such as a very short elimination period , may not be worth the extra cost .
Long Term Health Insurance -LRB- known as Long Term Care Insurance -RRB- is worth it for some people and not for others . If you have a large amount of savings , investments , and/or property , Long Term Care Insurance can protect your estate by paying for the cost of caring for you if you can not care for yourself . If you have very little in the way of assets , LTCI may not be worth it , as Medicaid would cover the cost of staying in a nursing home . However , whether you have a large estate or not , Long Term Care Insurance does provide some freedom in choosing where you receive your care . And for some people that is worth the price of the insurance .
There are several ways to look at that . If you are still living the death benefit is not worth anything currently . But the cash value has a definite worth . The cash surrender value is what most people would consider the worth of you life insurance . But there is also a reduced paid up amount that you could opt for that would possibly be worth more to you .
As mentioned previously , while net worth is a factor , income is the primary determinant for underwriting the amount of life insurance coverage allowed -LRB- applied for plus inforce amounts -RRB- . Above age 70 , net worth is very important in determining maximum coverage allowed . Net worth , income and the premium for the requested coverage are considered together using different formulas . Generally , the maximum total coverage allowed will be 50 % of net worth .
If you have a critical illness in your future , and will have received a lump sum of money to get you through that process of treatment and -LRB- hopefully -RRB- recovery , you will have thought it is worth it . No one knows the future . To some , having the knowledge that such a benefit would be provided if they are diagnosed with a life threatening illness , is worth it . To others , that is not such a big deal . Whether it is worth getting critical illness insurance or not is really a person decision . That being said , there are many more survivors of critical illnesses now than in the past . So it is a risk worth considering .
Whether Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance is worth it to you depends on whether you can survive at least 5 months without your salary , or would be willing to work at a job you can do vs a job you were trained for . Both of these must occur before being able to get Social Security Disability . Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance can pay approximately 60 % of your salary while recovering from a long illness of slow healing injury until you can get your old type of job back . That is worth it , to most people .
Disability insurance is a way to protect your income if you were to become sick or disabled . If you were unable to work and earn an income because of a sickness or injury , a disability insurance policy would pay you a portion of your income so you could continue to live the lifestyle you are accustomed to . Think of how much your ability to earn an income is actually worth . If you make $ 40,000 per year and are planning to work for another 25 years , If you multiply your income by the number of years you will work then your ability to earn an income is worth $ 1,000,000 -LRB- $ 40,000 X 25 years -RRB- . The actual figure will be much higher because you will most likely get raises .
Disability Income insurance -LRB- DI -RRB- being expensive is a relative question , and the question back is `` Relative to what ? `` Then , it becomes a question of value : `` Does the value provided by a policy that replaces up to about 2/3 of one 's income if they become unable to work due to accident or illness justify the premium the agent is showing me ? `` First , let 's just deal with the question of cost . Disability income insurance does become expensive the older one gets . Whereas the premium for a DI policy might run about 1-2 % of one 's income in their 20 's , it could cost about 4-5 % of their income in their late 40s or 50s . After age 60 , few carriers will even consider an application for DI insurance -LRB- although there are specialty carriers that will write `` term '' DI over that age -RRB- . DI is a complex insurance contract and has many `` moving parts '' . The more risk you want to transfer to the insurance company -LRB- amount of income to replace , inflation protection of income being replaced , future purchase of monthly benefit without the need to medically qualify , to name a few -RRB- , the higher the premium.Obtaining DI insurance through employee benefits may cost nothing - the employer picks up the tab for all employees . There may also be options to `` buy up '' additional coverage not provided in the employer-paid portion of the coverage . This is an inexpensive way to get at least some coverage against the risk of not being able to work for an extended period of time.Buying one 's own DI contract , however , puts the policyowner in control of all costs and coverage available from the insurance company . Whereas group DI can be canceled without notice by an employer , and when one leaves employment with that company DI coverage is rarely portable , owning one 's own policy usually provides the best , long-term solution to the problem . When you own your own DI , your coverage can not be cancelled . Premiums may also be guaranteed to never go up . And , regardless of where you work after getting your own policy , you 're covered.So , is DI expensive ? Run the numbers on yourself . If you could n't work for an extended period of time - or never be able to work -LRB- permanent and total disability -RRB- - how would you pay the cost of living ? Mortgage payments ? Food ? Rent ? Clothing ? Car payments?One is more likely to experience a disabling event in his/her lifetime than to die prematurely . Insure your paycheck . The cost is worth it .
Either you are referring to the best disability insurance company or the best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance . There are several excellent disability companies in the disability market place . One of the best is The Standard . The best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance is to determine if you can expense the premium as a business deduction and apply for 80 % of your compensation . While it is true that any benefits received will be subject to ordinary income tax , a deduction today is worth the risk of taxable event in the future . Nondeductible disability protects up to 60 % of your compensation with tax free distribution of benefits . If youre in a high tax bracket , the spread in benefits -LRB- 80 % versus 60 % -RRB- and the savings in the annual deduction are incentives to expense the premium if you have a legitimate business . Keep in mind that you can also buy disability insurance to cover your qualified plan contributions as well .
I love this question ! I have clients right now who pay more for collision coverage than they could ever collect on a total loss . It make no sense at all , it 's just what they 've always done . There 's a loose formula that I use in advising my clients about insuring an older vehicle . Look on KBB.com or Edmunds and get a rough idea of what your car is worth . Do n't use the `` clean retail '' . That 's completely unrealistic . Use the average trade or rough . It 'll be closer to the truth . Also check autotrader to get a range of what the cars are being listed for . Once you have a pretty good idea of what your car is worth , compare it to the cost of your physical damage coverage . If the cost of the coverage is more than 10 % of the value , you might consider dropping the coverage . That means that , in about 2-3 years , you 'd spend more than the value of the car . If you do have an accident , you get to make the decision on whether to repair the car or replace it . You 've already saved enough to do either -LRB- if you have n't spent your savings -RRB- . Bottom line , be aware of what your vehicles are worth and act accordingly . Spending money on coverage that would n't pay much does n't make a whole lot of sense . That 's not your agent 's place to decide for you , but we deal with it a lot and can make a suggestion . Find a good agent you can trust and go through the process . You 'll save money in the long run .
Personal Disability Insurance is worth it if you need your income to live the life you are accustomed to , or to provide for others . Disability due to injury or illness is something that can happen at any age . Spending 3 % of one 's salary to protect you from a total loss of income in the future is worth it for most people .
Disability insurance , also referred to as paycheck protection , pays a monthly benefit to the insured should he or she become disabled to an illness or injury . The monthly benefit is typically 60-65 % of one 's income . The average US worker only has 3 months worth of cash reserves , so disability insurance would help offset the costs brought on by a long-term disability .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Who Is Covered By Health Insurance ?
That 's a great question ! The answer is that because of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- everyone is now eligible to obtain health insurance coverage . Before the passing of the Act , insurers had the right to deny you coverage if you had an illness before applying for their policy . Calling it a `` pre-existing condition '' , one that you already had , they were n't obligated to assume responsibility for paying for it , and would deny you . That practice was outlawed under the ACA.Each person who wants health insurance that is unable to get it through an employer can now go to the WEBSITELINK website , and find a plan for them . There is an enrollment period each year in the fall when you can shop for and purchase your policy . If you need help , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
An affidavit of spousal health insurance is a legal document that may be required by an employer or governmental health plan -LRB- such as a state 's Children 's Health Insurance Plan or CHIP -RRB- that documents if the employee or applicant 's spouse is employed and if they are eligible for or covered by their employer 's group health insurance plan . This form will be used to determine if the spouse is eligible for enrollment or determine that their employer 's plan will pay in a primary capacity -LRB- pays the claim first -RRB- and the other employer 's plan or the government based health plan will pay in a secondary capacity -LRB- paying on any unpaid balance after the primary insurance carrier has paid on a claim -RRB- . Expect to see these types of forms in your workplace or if you or a family member are accessing public health insurance programs . Increasing numbers of employers , both private sector and public sector , are making efforts to move dependent spouses who have access to health insurance elsewhere off of their plans and onto the spouse 's employer 's plan . Increasingly an additional premium penalty is being applied to employees who insist on covering a spouse who has coverage available through another employer or source . And , in the more extreme circumstances some employers are declining to cover spouses at all . These actions are a result of the increasing costs of health care that employers and governmental agencies are experiencing and to a quirk in the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- that does not define a spouse as a dependent . Unfortunately , this is what happens when politician 's pass a law without reading it as was the case with the 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act .
Many employees have been surprised and concerned to see the value of their employer provided health insurance being reported on their W2 's . This is a requirement of the Affordable Care Act . Under transitional relief guidelines issued , so far only employers who issue 250 or more W2 forms in a calendar year are required to report this information . Eventually all employers who provide health insurance to their employees will be required to report this information on the employee 's W2 . This reporting of the employer paid amount for health insurance is for `` informational '' purposes only and is not being added to the employee 's gross income for income tax purposes . There are some skeptics who see this as a precursor to the eventual tax treatment of employer paid health insurance as employee income at some future date but at this time there is nothing in the Affordable Care Act or any pending legislation that would do this . Where this reporting of employer paid health insurance will become a tax issue will be in 2018 when the `` Cadillac Tax '' portion of the health care law goes into effect . The Cadillac Tax will be a 40 % excise tax imposed on health insurance plans whose annual premium costs exceed $ 10,200 for an individual or $ 27,500 for family coverage -LRB- these amounts will be indexed for inflation -RRB- . So , an employer in 2018 who finds themselves with health plan premium levels exceeding these amounts will be assessed a 40 % tax penalty . While such annual premium amounts may seem unreachable by many persons in 2014 . In some areas of the country , and especially with some very rich collectively bargained plans , total costs are already coming close to these trigger points . When one observes the increases in group health insurance plan costs already triggered by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act in 2014 and applies projected inflationary trend increases over the next few years it becomes much easier to estimate that a larger portion of employer based plans could find themselves subject to this tax penalty . This is one of the underlying motivations for more employers to move to high deductible health insurance plans in order to reduce their premium costs .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
YES , in the aggregate sense . Perhaps for some individuals or groups their particular situation will allow them to benefit from the changes in rating methods and benefits required by the Affordable Care Act . But for most individuals and groups I am entirely comfortable in predicting higher health insurance costs . First of all , the underlying cost of health care services continues to rise . As these costs rise the cost of insuring these services must rise accordingly , this has been the case throughout my 30 years in the health insurance industry . Secondly , we are beginning to get a picture of what the enrollment composition in the individual health insurance marketplaces is looking like . As predicted by many industry professionals , the enrollment is skewing towards an older and sicker population with the highly desired young and healthy population largely remaining on the sidelines . Just today one of nation 's largest pharmacy management companies reported their preliminary analysis of the prescription utilization of marketplace enrollees vs their pre-health care reform population . Usage of expensive prescription medications for serious chronic health problems is 47 % higher , and this is just based on a couple of months of utilization data ! While some hold out the hope that the people who waited until the last moment to enroll were disproportionately young and healthy , my own experience enrolling people gives little indication that this was the case . So , the table has been set for adverse selection -LRB- more sick than healthy enrollees -RRB- in the health insurance pool , especially for the insurance carriers who elected to participate in the government health insurance marketplaces . This can not help but translate into higher health insurance costs for 2015 and in many areas of the country this will translate into very significant double digit increases in individual and small group health insurance . This has already been broadly hinted at by all the major health insurance carriers , it 's really not a question of `` if '' but just `` how much '' .
Job loss is always a unsettling period in our lives and having to address your health insurance concerns only compounds things . The first thing you should look into is the feasibility of continuing your coverage through your former employer 's health plan under either your state 's continuation of coverage provisions or , if your employer has 20 + employees , under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . Unless you were terminated with cause your former employer should have provided you with information regarding your rights in this area . If you have a spouse who is employed and has health insurance coverage available through their employer this is a qualifying event for you to be added as a dependent on your spouse 's plan or for you and your spouse to both enroll in the spouse 's employer 's health plan if you had both been enrolled under your former employer 's health plan . If your spouse has access to coverage through their employer this will almost certainly make you ineligible for subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Some people , especially those with family coverage , may find paying the entire premium for the former employer 's health plan to be cost prohibitive or may not want to continue be covered under it for other reasons . Losing coverage from an employer 's group health plan is a `` Qualifying Event '' that grants you a `` Special Election Period '' under the Affordable Care Act . You have a 60-day window after losing coverage to purchase individual health insurance either directly from an insurance carrier or through the state or Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in your state . The only good reason to purchase your coverage through a government health insurance marketplace is if your income level for 2015 would qualify you for a premium subsidy and possibly for cost sharing reductions . Currently a person 's qualification for these subsidies is based upon the applicant 's projected FAMILY income for all of 2015 . So , your situation is not an uncomplicated one . SEEK OUT AN EXPERIENCED HEALTH INSURANCE BROKER WHO REPRESENTS MULTIPLE INSURANCE CARRIERS AND WHO IS LICENSED TO SELL COVERAGE IN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE FOR GUIDANCE ON THESE MATTERS . If you are in good health and pre-existing condition coverage is not a concern for you , then in the event that the options I 've listed above do n't fit your financial needs , you can consider Short Term Major Medical insurance coverage as bridge coverage if you anticipate getting another job in the weeks or months ahead . These policies are usually less expensive -LRB- sometimes significantly so -RRB- than the options discussed above and can provide protection from financial ruin in the event an illness or injury occurs while the Short Term Medical policy is in effect . PLEASE NOTE : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty so there could be tax ramifications if you are covered under such a policy for more than 90-days . This does not mean that a Short Term Medical policy is an option you should not consider but it is an option that you should choose only with a full understanding of the positives and negatives associated with this choice . Which is another reason you should seek the guidance of an experienced Health Insurance Broker .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Great question ! Typically a policy , whether it is a renters , health or life insurance policy will only cover the person or persons named on the policy . So if you put you and your spouse , you both are covered . If you name your family , then you all are covered . If it is just you , and you have a roommate who is not named , you are covered , they are most likely not . Check your policy and see who is listed , and who they will cover , or call your agent and have them tell you . Thanks for asking !
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Is Renters Insurance Really Necessary ?
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Insurance may be required by your landlord . Otherwise insurance is never necessary . If you are able to sustain a large lawsuit with ease , then you dont need a renters policy . If your rental unit burns to the ground and you lose everything that you have in it , and it wouldnt even merit an entry in your check book , then you dont need a renters policy . If you dont need a friend to stand with you with money in their hand when things really go wrong , then you dont need a renters policy .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
Necessary is a matter of perspective . I believe that renters insurance is necessary for every person renting a premise . Renters insurance will not only provide protection for your personal property in the event of a covered loss but also provides liability protection in the event that someone is injured in your residence just to name a couple of the major coverages . Contact a local agent to find out more about all of the advantages of having this coverage .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Is disability insurance really necessary ? No , of course not . It is only necessary if you do not have the available liquefiable assets on hand to use to replace lost income . Or if you desire not to sell assets for pennies on the dollar when you become disabled . Each person really has to decide if DI is really necessary for them . For most , it is .
Medicare does not pay for private duty nurses , or a private room when not medically necessary . You are really describing Long Term Care which is also not included in Medicare . There is a difference in skilled care , respite care and personal care . If you qualify for medically necessary skilled care , Medicare will cover that , but as you asked the question , my response would be no it does not .
Why is health insurance necessary ? Actually it 's not necessary , at least for another year . In 2014 changes will be coming . But as of today , health insurance is not necessary to have . You can self insure . The thing is if you self insure and have claims , you 're expected to pay them . So you would have to surrender assests to pay that bill . Insurance of ANY KIND is simply a form of liquid money to pay for things so that your other invested wealth can `` stay '' invested . So no insurance is never necessary , it just is a smart solution for some issues .
Insurance is what many would call a `` necessary evil '' . We pay for it to ensure that there will be some help in the event we face a loss . The absence of insurance can wipe out a family or business financially . When in place Insurance can cover medical expenses , automobile accidents , dental services , real estate , valuables and a persons life . It is definitely necessary to help cover potential losses that could happen to any of us . I know sometimes it hurts but we really need to look into having it .
A good Renters Insurance Company is one that is well rated , financially stable and provides the necessary coverage for your Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- and ample Personal Liability Coverage . We recommend sufficient contents coverage to replace your furniture , appliances and clothing and also the highest available personal liability coverage available ; in many cases the premium difference between the minimum and maximum amount of liability may be as little as $ 35 per yeardepending on the geographic location of the insured risk . Should you be seeking a lower premium , we suggest raising the deductible rather than lowering your necessary coverage . Taking a little more risk on the front end will prove to lower your premium substantially as the majority of longer term insured customers take the higher deductible options , enjoy a lower premium and thus remain loyal to the respective carrier for a long time . There is a link available to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States.for those that would rather shop the riskand buy insurance online without the personal interaction of an insurance agent , this may prove very helpful.An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
To be specific about what health insurance does not cover , you would have to check your plan 's policy 's exclusions & limitations . However , if you 're asking a general question , I think the key term here is `` medically necessary '' . If your provider bills a service as medically necessary , then it would generally be covered . From a common sense standpoint , why would an insurance company cover something that 's not medically necessary . A good example of something that 's not medically necessary is cosmetic surgery .
Unfortunately there is no magic formula for recommendations on renters insurance , each policy can be as unique as the person purchasing it . The typical major components of renters insurance are liability coverage , personal property coverage , loss of use coverage , and any endorsements that are necessary to provide higher limits of coverage for specific items . Contact a local agent to discuss your needs and wants when it comes to a renters policy they will be able to explain the coverages available allowing you to make a more informed decision .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
There is an old expression regarding personal insurance : Whatever the coverage remember your really insuring people . The idea is that you can underwrite insurance including renters insurance from such items as amount of insurance , location , prior losses , amount of liability coverage and such , but behind every policy is a person . So , you can expect that most companies today use rating algorithms that include the items mentioned above as insurance score -LRB- a variation of credit scores -RRB- , your age , whether you have vicious dogs , occupation and whether the property will be occupied by you during the day etc. . Typically , it is an inexpensive policy and as such there really is not a lot of money in the commission nor expense factor of the company . What that means is that it is underwritten by class and one policy is not much different than the other . My recommendation to you is to start with your auto insurer . I frequently find the pricing of renters policy nearly all offset by the savings you get from having both with the same company . To give you an example here in the Atlanta area a 25,000 contents renters policy might be $ 150 per year , while the amount of credit for having it with the same company on your auto policy might be as much as $ 125 .
Travelers Insurance Company has an excellent renters insurance policy . The Form HO-4 covers Personal Property and Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant -LRB- insured -RRB- . Renters Insurance is a very valuable coverage because it no only offers protection against damage to your personal property but also protection against negligence and personal liability cases that may be brought against you . One valuable example is if there is fire , smoke or water damage to the rented home or apartment unit , the property owner 's insurance company will most likely attempt to collect damages from the tenant if they can prove negligence . In this case , Renters Insurance will provide the legal representation to handle the situation although the policy limit will apply . If you are not sure and do n't really want to commit to purchase renters insurance but may or may not be required to according to your lease agreement , the best way to generate the lowest annual premium is to select the minimum personal property coverage available , the lowest limit of personal liability and the highest available deductible for the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met ; days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 152 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Qualifications to receive the Medicare SNF benefit : 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Although a Medicare plan may cover SNF copayments , given the qualification restrictions for the Medicare SNF benefit , Medicare beneficiaries should consider separate Short Term Care nursing facility coverage to manage the financial risk of an uncovered SNF stay .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
My Friend Wrecked My Car . What Happens Now ?
The claim will be investigated and fault will be determined . If it was the other parties fault then if all goes well the other parties insurance will pay for the damages . If not then plan B is since you do not have physical damage coverage on your own policy which would normally pay for damages then next in line would be your friends policy which should cover the damages . Of course all of this depends on if there are any exclusions in the policies .
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
f they are in an accident you are liable for the damage if your friend wrecks and hit someone . You need to list them as drivers on your policy along with the car . Depending on how long this `` borrowing '' lasts . Montana is a permissive use policy state so if you borrowed a car to someone then they got into an accident your insurance has to cover it unless you do not have the car on the insurance policy but you also are required to have your cars insured . Now if your friends are only borrowing for a week or two then there is n't a needed to add then to your policy Hope this helps
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
The average cost in the US has been around $ 850 for the past several year . My data could be a bit off and old , but in the last several years competition for auto business has kept pricing static . Here is the basic issue question : I do n't know who you are in a demographic sense , but also in the sense of needing coverage to protect yourself . . Auto Insurance is regulated by the various 50 states and can a bit different in what coverages are required to be offered.But here is what typically comprises and auto policy : Bodily Injury Liability -LRB- protection for the people you kill or injure -RRB- Property Damage -LRB- for the car you hit or the 18 wheeler you force off the road unintentionally -RRB- Medical Payments for the little issue that happens in your car that you do n't want to have to file suit against some one to be indemnified -LRB- i.e. your passenger catching their finger in the closing of a door -RRB- Collision for damage to your own car in a wreck or hitting a curb or a pot hole etc. . ComprehensiveCoverage : for theft , flood , hail , falling trees , broken windshields etc And last , but probably the most important coverage on your policy , Uninsured and Under-insured Motorist Coverage So , despite all the ads to the contrary you ought to take more than 15 minutes to figure , with the help of an agent , what exposures you have . The worst scenarios have nothing to do with fixing your cars , it is about fixing peoples lives and keeping you assets . So to answer your question I would need to know what do you have to lose , if you cause injury to someone else , because what you do not pay for in insurance you will pay for on your own including future garnishment of your income . A fairly decent rule of thumb to consider things by would be to look at your lifestyle . If you already own your own home -LRB- including with a mortgage -RRB- you need a minimum of 100/300/100 spit limits of Bodily Injury Coverage -LRB- that protects the people you hit -RRB- and you should carry the same to protect yourself , your family and passengers in your car with the same limit of 100/300/100 for Uninsured and under insured motorist coverage . If you do not understand how all of these pieces of the coverage fit together then you should really seek out an Independent agent who sells for multiple companies and can tailor the policy to your needs If you live in AZ , CA , TX , GA , or MO I would be glad to assist you -LRB- call 1-866-933-4372 -RRB- -LRB- open 8 AM to 8 PM Est Monday through Friday -RRB- . If you live elsewhere seek out an Independent Agent in your area Good luck to you and I hope this answer helps some Jack Heller , CPCU
I have an in ground pool in my own back yard and we absolutely love it . It 's great being the house that all my kids ' friends want to go to . But , does it increase my insurance premiums ? Not necessarily , although it probably should . I 'll explain why in just a moment . First , let 's look at what an insurance company wants if you do have a pool . The biggest thing they want is a fenced enclosure around the entire pool . They want to be sure that anyone who enters the pool intended to enter the pool . Also to keep animals and small children from wandering into the pool . It 's usually not a case of a premium increase , it 's a yes or no question . If you do what they want -LRB- fence -RRB- , they 'll usually insure you with no increases . If you do n't do what they want , they 'll just refuse to insure you . Now , why would your premium increase ? Because a pool brings more liability along with it . Bad things can happen even if you take precautions . I would recommend liability limits of at least $ 500,000 and , usually at least a $ 1,000,000 umbrella policy . Doing this may cost you a little more but it 's well worth it . It may be as little as $ 85/year or it may be a little more depending on your home , cars , and family . Be smart , spend small dollars now to avoid big dollars later .
Let me add one other use for Non Owned liability coverage . You work in an occupation where the owner of the business is also the owner of the vehicle you use on a regular basis . Non owned vehicle coverage can play an important role in protecting you . Keep in mind that your employer buys coverage to protect his/her interest not yours . If you own an auto , and are faced with an employer providing basic coverage then it is called Extended Non Owned Liability coverage . If you do not own any car then it is referred to as Non Owned Liability Coverage -LRB- not Extended at that point -RRB- Non owned coverage can be a very valuable way of protecting you , your family or guest passengers in your car . Most large employers are not concerned with Uninsured Motorist or Underinsured Motorist Coverage . But you should be . In about 14 % of all wrecks the adverse driver who causes the wreck will have no insurance . so now you need the protection of uninsured and under insured motorist coverage which is not something your employer worries about -LRB- its your life not his or hers -RRB- so , be sure you buy a non owned liability policy in these circumstances and match the UM and UIM limits with your liability limit of coverage
Market value -LRB- what others would pay for same car -RRB- with plus or minus depending on features , condition of vehcle , age , mileage -LRB- thats a big one -RRB- , type of car , quality of car , car been wrecked or under water ... As much as they cost now I recommend that you always get REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE and you get GAP COVERAGE . ALSO , GET EXTENDED WARRANTY FROM THE DEALER . I have been involved in these issues so many times that I still sit down and cry like a baby . People get it in the back so many times just because they are ignorant of coverages that are available to them ... shame shame agents and shame shame tightwad idiots
No . Auto insurance pays to repair your car if you wreck it . It can also pay to repair other people 's cars if you hit them . To cover funeral expenses you need life insurance of some sort . There are funeral preneed insurance policies for this specific purpose or you can use any death benefit from any life insurance that is in force at the time of your death . Also your funeral planning insurance wo n't pay for your car to be repaired if you wreck it .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
The best way to get a close guess to what they will pay for your car is to run a value of your car prior to the damage . Many use the nada.com or Kelly blue book both are online . This will give you a close price to what they will give you . Also you can contact most car dealerships and ask them the value of your car before it was wrecked .
Lets say you have a hundred friends and each has an automobile . If they could agree that they wanted to have enough money to pay legal expenses that they might have if they are responsible for an accident , you could form an insurance company . If you were able to determine -LRB- from actuarial studies -RRB- the amount of money you could anticipate spending in helping each other out in the coming year and the amount was $ 50,000 you would then know the basic share for each friend , $ 500 -LRB- $ 50,000 / 100 -RRB- Someone in your group will probably object because they only take their car to shows once or twice a year and certainly dont have the exposure the rest of the friends have . Another will object because they live on a farm and rarely drive into town -LRB- although it might be a long ways . -RRB- They will contend that their exposure is less than the other friends . Another friend will complain because one of the friends has a street-legal racing car and it is more likely that it will be involved in an accident . One of your friends has a drinking problem and no one really wants a share of his legal liability . And so it goes . What at one time seemed simple and logical becomes increasingly complex . Actuaries are a rare group of people who compile data and have the ability to slice that data in many different ways to determine the effects of the location where the car is garaged , average annual miles , credit risk of the owner , make , model and year of the vehicle . In fact , these actuaries can compute over 100 rating areas for an automobile . The point that this exercise makes is to distribute the risk that all of us face equitably . I have been asked if a red car costs more to insure than others . I am sure that a study somewhere has shown that red cars have a slightly higher than average accident rate . It is something that could be used in the rating process . I have been asked if a previously totaled car , now registered legally can be insured based upon that same concern for a fair premium . So actuaries give the insurance company many alternatives upon which they can design a rating scheme for an automobile . In my state the scheme is set by state law . Actually the California Constitution dictates how automobile policies will be rated . So legislative action can have a profound effect on automobile rating . Most states give authority to their insurance commissioner to regulate automobile insurance rates . Their charge is not so much to maintain fairness as it is to make sure that the companies take in enough premiums to pay the claims that are anticipated . In other words , the commissioner does everything in his or her power to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . Insurance companies keep very close tabs on the claims that they pay and the premiums that they take in . Actually the actuaries get involved in this as well , to determine if they are charging enough for every different type of coverage . When the company fails to receive enough premiums to pay all of the claims in a given year , they approach the commissioner and propose a rate increase . At this point the company has done everything possible to spread the risk appropriately , however , there are some areas that they want to adjust to make sure that the company is being fair and that the company can continue to keep its promises . That is how a company computes what it will charge you for your car .
Depending on your carrier there are several ways . To get a rough Idea of the value of your totaled car there are several things you can do before settling for what the carrier is offering . you can check the value of your auto before it was wrecked at nada.com or Kelly blue book . Also you can contact your local car dealership and ask them what your car would of sold for and the value of it prior to the accident .
They price their products based on risk . That 's what insurance is . If you have a lot of tickets you are likely to wreck your car . You should pay more than a safe driver pays for auto insurance . You are riskier . If you have bad health , you have to pay more for health insurance and life insurance . You are more likely to be making claims on the insurance sooner . To not charge you more would require charging more to healthy people . Health insurance is changing from true insurance to an entitlement program . This will make it less costly than it is now for unhealthy people but it will raise rates for all the healthier and younger ones . It should be a good change but time will tell . But to answer your question ... would YOU want to be the insurance company and charge a 16-year old male driver with three tickets the same rate as the 45-year old woman with no tickets . If you answer yes , you should open an insurance company . You will get a lot of young customers before you go broke .
A car insurance company will generally provide you with the value of your car - - pre wreck . A car insurance company will typically take a look at similar vehicles and how much they are selling for in your area . They may also take a look at the Kelly Blue Book Value .
I am working on a case right now in which my client has applied for 11 policies . Here is the breakdown : He is a partner in one business with two other fellows . They have just completed a buy-sell agreement and are funding the agreement with life insurance . Per the advice of their accountant and their attorney , they are purchasing several policies to cover both the current and the anticipated future value of the business . One policy will be owned by the business , and four other policies will be owned by a trust . That gives us five policies so far . My client is also a partner in a second business , with another fellow . They are following the same funding strategy . That business will own one policy , and the trust will own an additional four . Our count is now up to 10 policies . But these policies take care only of business needs . My client is also married with children . He needs life insurance for family protection . So he is purchasing yet another policy for their benefit . That gives us 11 . The underwriter is fine with this set up . My client can justify the need for all policies financially . All policies have been deemed appropriate with regard to the financial needs of the business and the financial needs of his family . And you know what ? He could buy more if he wanted to . Lets suppose he supported a number of charities . They could be religious , or social service , or political . He could take out a separate policy for each of their benefit . Five charities , five more policies . But we have another consideration . What if his net worth is over $ 5 million , and he wants to preserve his estate for his heirs ? What if he wants to avoid forcing his family to liquidate his assets just to pay Uncle Sams estate tax bill ? He could buy life insurance to cover the tax bill . Another policy . We are not done yet :-RRB- . What if his parents were financially dependent on him . It happens . What if his premature demise would put them in financial straits ? He could buy life insurance on himself for their benefit , so they could be well taken care of . Do you realize that in this scenario , this one client could take out 20 or so policies ? And it would all be financially justified and appropriate . How do you like that ? Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
That is a great question ! You are very wise to be focused on accomplishing a goal for your retirement , and for setting an early goal . It is very difficult to give you a number that works for you though , without having a lot more detail about where you are in the process now . Are you 40 next year ? Realistically , that number would be different from what it would be if you are 25 next year . I also have no idea of your expenses , spending habits , medical needs , etc. . A good rule of thumb ? Have 8-10 times your current salary put away if you want to live your current lifestyle . I 'd also advise to have some type of hedge against long term care costs , as statistics show 70 % of Senior Citizens will require it at some point , and those costs have wrecked many a retirement fund that would have been fine otherwise . Pleas contact an advisor who can look at your situation , and give you some tailored advice . Thanks for asking !
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Hey , it happens . Sometimes we make a mistake and end up in a situation we did n't intend . It does n't mean you ca n't get car insurance , it just changes the finances . Now , I can only speak for the State of Michigan , but I do n't imagine it 's very different in other states . When your insurance company finds out you got a DUI -LRB- and they will -RRB- , they will , most likely , cancel your policy as you 're no longer eligible to be covered under a standard company . There are , however , other nonstandard companies that will be happy to insure you , at a price . Companies such as Titan/Victoria , Progressive , Bristol West , and others will still insure you . Now , I 'm assuming you still have a valid license -LRB- If not , it 'll be more difficult -RRB- . It would n't surprise me if your premiums tripled or more with these companies but there are ways to help manage your costs . If you look at the quotes from these companies , you 'll probably see that more than half the premium is in the physical damage coverages -LRB- comprehensive and collision -RRB- . If you can live without these coverages , you can save a lot of money , but be aware that they will not fix your car if you have damage . Also , if your car is leased or financed , you 're bound by contract to carry these coverages . In this case , you can raise deductibles but it wo n't make a huge difference . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages , these are much more important . Now the bad news . You may not be eligible to be insured with a standard carrier for up to 5 years . And you thought the fines and court costs were high . This is where it really hurts . I hope you have a good agent , he/she is your best friend right now . Work with them and see what you can do to minimize your costs without sacrificing the most important coverages
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Liability ?
Most home owners insurance policies have liability built into the policy . Usually , the limits can be raised to $ 1,000,000 . Considering that the average premises liability award in 2008 was $ 848,702 , having high limits of liability is a good idea . As I 've said in other posts , I highly recommend an `` umbrella '' policy to increase your limits of liability .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Let 's be realistic , your home is where you are at and a reasonably understanding of liability means you can be held responsible for the injuries a guest suffers while in your home . Your responsibility in any event is n't likely to absolve the property management company -LRB- or the property owner -RRB- of liability -LRB- or at least a duty to defend themselves -RRB- because no self-respecting plaintiff 's attorney would let a potential pocket full of money get by him or her in the process of assigning liability . The good news is that if you have home insurance you have some amount of liability insurance to protect for the injuries that someone may suffer as a consequence of your negligence anywhere you are at . That includes the time share you have bought and including the property you have traded for in your time-share relationship . Now , none of the latter should be construed to make you liable for any event , only to clarify that you are indeed responsible for your actions and that includes the space you may be occupying as a temporary residence , whether a time share or a hotel room . How much liability you have depends on plenty of things we could speculate on but the answer above stands for itself . Even if you are found to be free of liability , the cost of defense and getting to that point in time after an event is still costly and your liability coverage includes the benefit of defense against these allegations . Liability is expensive to defend and costly to pay for in the absence of insurance so a basic understanding of the tort of negligence and your duties is all I intend to imply in the latter answer .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
A swimming pool is an attractive luxury and may in many ways enhance the sales value of your home , but your insurance company factors it as a possible risk . Homes are insured based on reconstruction value and relative risk to the insuring carrier . A swimming pool can pose a threat to the carrier since there lies the possibility of danger and a personal liability . It is more likely that a child or impaired adult may become injured in or by the pool rather than your home being destroyed by fire . In most cities around the country , there is an ordinance in force requiring homeowners to have swimming pools within a fenced yard protected by a latched gate so not to invite strangers to the use of the pool without the owner 's permission and knowledge ; insurance companies all impose the condition that a swimming pool is in a fenced and gated area without public access . Even though the swimming pool poses a greater liability risk , most insurance carriers do not assess an increase in premium ; however , they will always ask if you have a diving board and/or slide . The diving board and slide pose a much greater risk than the swimming pool itself . Some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board , slide or a trampoline in the yard . For homeowners with a swimming pool , it is highly recommended to carry the highest available personal liability insurance limit ; most likely $ 500,000 , in most States , there is no deductible applicable to the liability portion of the policy and the premium is unlikely to cost more than $ 40 - $ 80 per year for the additional liability insurance coverage . If this topic is of greater concern , you may purchase a Personal Umbrella Policy which in most cases will provide an Excess Form of liability up to $ 5 Million of coverage for a separate premium .
Adequate home insurance coverage is very important , and the discussion should be had with a professional independent agent . The best way to answer this question is to provide some general information for the primary/main coverage types on the home insurance policy -LRB- please note that each state and company policy coverages and requirements vary . This is why it is important to review in detail with your professional independent agent -RRB- . Dwelling value : this is the coverage limit that protects the structure/dwelling . Ideally , this coverage limit needs to be set at the proper replacement cost valuation . In the event of a total loss -LRB- fire , tornado ... -RRB- , what is the amount of insurance coverage on your dwelling that you would need to get you back in that exact same house?The answer to this question is the dwelling amount coverage limit that your home insurance policy should have . Personal property/contents coverage limit : this is the coverage that provides protection for your personal belongings . It is suggested to take pictures of your belongings -LRB- especially your more valuable items -RRB- as well as have copies of the pictures and any receipts to provide proof of ownership in the event of a claim . Again , like with the dwelling value we discussed above , the question here is what is the value of all of your items in your house ? Or , what would thecost be toget everythingwhat you have now in your house if a fire or tornado destroyed it all?The answer to this question is the personal property contents limit that your home insurance policy should have . Also - please note that if you have a mortgage on your home , most often the lender will require the loan amount or 100 % ofthecalculated structurereplacement value to be the required dwelling coverage amount.This amount can vary , and to ensure that you are getting the coverage protection you need without overinsuring , please review with your local professional independent agent . Liability coverage/medical pay to others : this is about the least-expensive part of a home insurance policy , but it is very important to have . The minimal amount of liability coverage suggested to have for this coverage category is $ 300,000 , although usually the bump up in coverage to the $ 500,000 liability limit is usually very small . And , the medical payments to others coverage should be at $ 5000 . These coverages protect you from injury that an unrelated -LRB- visitor -RRB- sustains while on your property , or that you are deemed to be liabile -LRB- responsible -RRB- for . Please note that these are just a couple of the important insurance coverages that are included on your home insurance . There are many other coverages that might be included with the policy that you choose or there might be other suggested coverages that you can add to your home policy that gives you the extra coverage protection that you need . There is not a general coverage limit or value that is used for determining the proper coverages for your home insurance . Every client is different and so are their needs . Make sure that you review what your needs and coverage requirements are , and let an independent agent create a policy specifically for you and your needs .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Homeowners Insurance and Title Insurance are not the same . Title insurance is insurance to make sure the title of the home is clean . For example you are purchasing a home from Mr. Doe . The title company is to make sure all information is accurate such as who is the seller , boundaries are correct and so on . If you purchased the home from Mr. Doe and you find out later there also was a MS. Doe who says I never gave permission to sell the home now there is a problem and title insurance would step in to cover this situation . Homeowners insurance is what you purchase to cover your actual dwelling and property , liability etc. . . for a potential loss .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
With all due respect to the answer given by the first insurance professional to answer this question , there are two different coverage angles to take into account . Let 's tackle the first issue and that is of the professional or product liability . A homeowner policy will not extend itself to cover the liability that arises our of the professional services to write software or machine code that is either given away or incorporated into a commercial product offered to others . In the event of a loss of lawsuit I do n't think you will find coverage and I think if a claim were to be presented a `` reservation of rights '' letter will be issued upon notification of a claim so the carrier can explore the issue prior to rejecting the loss as `` professional liability '' that is not covered in a liability section of a home insurance policy . On the other hand , many companies permit the use of the home for office related tasks and the liability exposure for pedestrian traffic onto the property and/or into the house will probably be covered when the avocation is merely a hobby . Usually the presence of this additional exposures are required to be admitted to the carrier . That said , all claims issues are ultimately compared against coverage terms and language and no one should rely on this general advice as anything other than a reminder to consult with your insurance agent for the best answer . And finally , I am aware of no coverage that is available for the hobby coder to add to a home insurance policy . It would be interesting to know if you actually work in the computer software business in your day to day paid work .
Homeowners Insurance consists of Dwelling Coverage -LRB- Home -RRB- , Other Structures , Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- , Loss of Use and Personal Liability Coverage . To answer the question , the Dwelling Coverage should be sufficient to rebuild the home from the ground up following a covered total loss ; this would be a total reconstruction estimate to rebuild the home . Most insurance carriers have a method of calculating the replacement cost of a dwelling based on the characteristics input when you request the initial quotation ; in most cases , this is a safe number to properly insure the home . Regarding Personal Liability Insurance , it is a good idea to purchase the maximum limit available since this coverage is very inexpensive and is not subject to any deductible . Most carriers offer a maximum limit of $ 500,000 for Personal Liability . If in the process of purchasing the necessary coverage , the consumer is attempting to generate a lower premium charge , it would be a good idea to accept a high deductible which will prove to offer a much lower premium with relatively low risk to the insured . There is a system available to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States . An exemplary online experience for all with the ability to select different options and adjust your home insurance quote as necessary . WEBSITELINK
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
Homeowners insurance is designed to cover your home and possessions if they are damaged in a covered loss or stolen . It also protects you in a lawsuit . It is totally different than a home warranty . A home warranty just covers you for undisclosed problems when you purchase a home . It does not cover your belongings , structure damage caused by fire , wind or other perils , liability , or theft .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can Medicare Have Dependents ?
No , Medicare is a health plan for individuals , and does not provide for dependents . Each person that receives Medicare must be eligible based on paying into Social Security taxes the required length of time -LRB- or if a spouse who did not work outside the home , based on the spouse 's contributions -RRB- and turning age 65 -LRB- or being disabled 2 + years or or a couple more situations -RRB- . If one spouse turns 65 and starts receiving Medicare , the other under-age-65 spouse , or children of the couple , can not receive Medicare based on that alone .
There is only one Medicare beneficiary per Medicare card , no dependents . You may receive medicare when turning 65 also know as aging in and or medicare disability after being certified on disability for 24 months . An excellent resource for answering your medicare questions can be found at www.medicare.gov
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
`` Excess Charges '' only occur with Part B coverage . Whether or not a Medicare Beneficiary may be subjected to Part B Excess Charges by a provider depends entirely on how the provider is contracted with Medicare . When the provider choose their method of contracting with Medicare they must choose whether they will be `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' . This terminology may be confusing but it really is not . `` Participating '' simply means the provider will accept the Medicare assignment of the Medicare approved amount as payment as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered . `` Non-Participating '' means the provider has chosen to not necessarily accept the Medicare approved amount as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered and may choose to charge the beneficiary up to 15 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- in addition to the beneficiary 's cost sharing amount -RRB- . The provider may choose on a case-by-case basis whether to seek excess charges from the beneficiary . This rule applies ONLY to physician fee schedules thus applies only to Medicare Part B charges . So it depends entirely upon whether the provider has chosen to contract as a `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' provider with Medicare . If you are in doubt it may be beneficial to contact the office manager at your provider 's office and ask whether the provider is `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' as it applies to Medicare approved payments . All the best . Mark
It depends on the are you live in and your individual situation . Humana is a Medicare Advantage Plan . Each area is different . If you can not afford a Medicare Supplement then I would shop for a good Medicare Advantage Plan in your area , it may be Humana or it may be another plan such as United Health Care , Aetna , or Anthem Blue Cross . A good local agent who is certified in Medicare Advantage plans and is familiar with the plans in your area can help guide you in the right direction . Every situation is different . A medicare Advantage Plan will offer more coverage than original Medicare . A Medicare Supplement offers even better coverage because it will pay in addition to original Medicare . Humana does offer a Medicare Supplement , but make sure you shop because they may not be the best option depending on where you live . Again , a good local agent can be a great help to you .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
It depends on your specific situation . Typically Medicare pays secondary to employer health plans depending on how may employees the employer has . If you have only Medicare and let 's say a Medicare Supplement , Medicare would be primary . Keep in mind it depends solely on what coverage you have with your Medicare .
Depends when you retire really because being in retirement has nothing to do with the prices . You 'd likely be looking at an individual health plan if you 're under age 65 so it will depend on your age , zip code , what health plan benefits you want , etc. . The premiums can be a as little as a couple hundred dollars per month or well over 500 per month . If you 're over 65 , you 're likely looking at Medicare coverage if you do n't qualify for any retiree programs from an employer . On Medicare , you 're looking at a couple of different options . If you want more comprehensive type coverage , you would want to buy a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- and pair it with a Part D prescription drug plan -LRB- if you want drug coverage -RRB- . If you want a Medicare type program that works similar to under age 65 individual health insurance works , then you may want to consider a Medicare Advantage plan . Medigap plans are standardized and do n't have annual enrollment periods to follow - Part D plans and Medicare Advantage plans do . The premiums for a Medigap plan depends on which one you want to get -LRB- there are 11 to choose from -RRB- , your age , zip code , and if you smoke or not . Medicare Advantage and Part D plans that are available depend on your zip code . You should consult with an independent insurance agent or broker who can discuss your specific insurance needs and preferences to determine which is the most suitable coverage for you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
Your question did not make clear whether you were wanting to add a dependent to a group or an individual health insurance plan . However , if it is not the open enrollment period for your employer 's group plan or you missed the recent individual plan open enrollment period , then you and/or your dependent will have to have experienced a `` change of life status event '' to qualify for being added to your coverage . While there are more , the most common examples are marriage , divorce , child birth andloss of coverage under another group or individual health insurance plan.Also , as a general rule , you have a 60-day window after the qualifying event to enroll an eligible dependent onto your coverage . If you are wanting to add a dependent to your employment based coverage your HR person , office manager or the company 's insurance broker should be able to assist you with the addition of your dependent to your coverage . If you are seeking to add a new dependent to an individual health insurance policy that you have then you should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company 's member services to unit -LRB- there should be a toll free telephone number on the back of you ID card -RRB- to get assistance in adding your new dependent . If you purchased coverage directly through HealthCare.gov , well , good luck , you are kind of on your own with a government bureaucracy to deal withon top of theinsurance carrier bureaucracy .
Medicare Advantage Plans are more feature rich than original Medicare . First , there is no out of pocket maximum under original Medicare . Medicare Advantage Plans have a Maximum out of pocket , usually between $ 3500 and $ 7000 , depending on the plan you choose . You also have copay 's which help you plan out your health care expenses . Original Medicare pays 80 % of the approved part B charges . Most Medicare Advantage Plans have Part D built into them , so you do not have to pay for a Prescription Drug Plan . Medicare Advantage Plan also provides extra benefits not covered by Medicare . The premium for a Medicare Advantage Plan can vary but there are still some $ 0 premium plans available that offer a great value .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Life insurance underwriting gives a lot of latitude to the definition of dependent . Its actually pretty interesting . I think this is because the whole principle of insurable interest implies a certain dependency . It is this principle that is the bottom line as to whether or not the company accepts the beneficiary designation on a submitted application . So who really can be dependent on the insured financially , and thereby qualify as a beneficiary on his or her policy ? Certainly a spouse . Does the spouse have to be working ? No . Can the spouse be rich and independently wealthy ? Yes . They still can be considered financially interdependent . Kids ? For sure . Minors ? Of course . How about children that are of legal age ? Well , they certainly could still be financially dependent on their parents . To some extent . -LRB- Until their parents boot them out of the nest :-RRB- Parents ? Yes . That is very common these days . Elder parents become dependent on their grown children financially . Sad to see , but it happens all the time . Other family members ? Could be . How many times do you see a family taking in a niece , nephew , cousin , aunt , or uncle ? Then you have the whole realm of domestic partners . Same sex . Opposite sex . Older man , younger woman . Older woman , younger man . As long as they have some kind of financial independence shared accounts , etc. they could be named as beneficiaries . And we havent even talked about how businesses can be dependent on people , as well as charities . Interesting , dont you think ?
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Many Life Insurance Members Does Aetna Have ?
Aetna is a stock life insurance carrier and as such has policyholders , not members . Aetna is a major insurance carrier involved in many areas of insurance and risk management . Aetna provides individual and group health insurance coverage . They also offer life insurance and Medicare plans . As such , Aetna has many hundred thousands of policyholders around the world .
Aetna is a stock life insurance carrier and as such has policyholders , not members . Aetna is a major insurance carrier involved in many areas of insurance and risk management . Aetna provides individual and group health insurance coverage . They also offer life insurance and Medicare plans . As such , Aetna has many hundred thousands of policyholders around the world .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
No . However , with their increasing commitment to wellness programs for their membership an increasing number of health insurance carriers , especially the big national ones like AETNA , Humana , CIGNA and many of the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans , have valued added benefits for their members that increasingly include discounts to health clubs/gyms . They are also often offering other incentive based plans to encourage better diets and activities such as walking & jogging for which their members can earn points good for a variety of rewards . You should check with your insurance carrier , your Human Resources person at work or your insurance broker for details on what programs your insurance carrier may be providing .
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
Depending upon your point of view , one could say that virtually all major health insurance carriers are equally good or bad in today 's marketplace . The health insurance industry has been highly regulated at the state level for decades and with the Affordable Care Act we have an entirely new set of Federal regulations for health insurer 's to comply with . So , yes , CIGNA offers excellent services . So , do AETNA , Assurant , Humana , United Healthcare and scores of other options around the nation . Defining how `` good '' CIGNA is versus any of its national competitors is a subjective exercise that means different things to different people . In the new health insurance marketplace of 2014 the informed buyer will have to understand that the insurance carriers have to devise different ways of covering up to $ 6250 in potential financial exposure per person in different plan design configurations and price points . The insurance carriers has to come up with their own ideas as to how to have plan designs that fit into the new `` Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum '' allowed by the law . Right now that can translate into some very meaningful benefit plan design differences between insurance carriers and within the same `` metallic ' tier level . You may have one insurance carrier offering only high deductible plans while a competitor may offer some plans with different office visit and/or prescription copayments and yet they both fall within the range of being qualified `` Bronze or Silver '' plan designs . Upon examination they will find that the various carrier 's first attempts at plan designs have yielded results that are often confusing , inconsistent and can be make it even more difficult for the non-insurance person to see the value differences between various carrier 's plans . This is where you start to come to those intersections of Price , Benefits and Network that help drive a person 's buying decision . At certain price points and for certain of their plan design 's overall benefits , CIGNA can offer some of the best coverage for the dollar in today 's marketplace . The are a nationally recognized brand with an large , national provider network and a growing offering of value added programs designed to keep their members healthy or effectively manage the chronically ill . While no one can say that any insurance carrier is the `` best '' in each and every way and every location . CIGNA strives for a consistency across the large number of various insured populations they serve . I can feel comfortable in saying that CIGNA should be part of your consideration in the individual and large group market segments .
AARP is not an insurance company . It is actually an organization . So it may endorse specific insurers or plans that are available to individuals and families , but nothing more than that . In the past , they have lent their name to Aetna and UnitedHealthcare for some of their products . And of course , the insurers pay them millions of dollars for that right . AARP members may not have a major say in those decisions .
Aetna states on their website that their life insurance coverage is available through employer provided plans only , and is not available for individual sale . So Aetna does have life insurance , but it can only be obtained through a group plan at one 's place of employment . To purchase an individual life insurance policy , contact an agency or website that advertises Life Insurance .
When plans renew or are effective on or after August 1 , 2012 , all of the following womens health services will be considered preventive -LRB- some were already covered -RRB- . These services generally will be covered at no cost share , when provided in network : Well-woman visits -LRB- annually and now including prenatal visits -RRB- Screening for gestational diabetes Human papillomavirus -LRB- HPV -RRB- DNA testing Counseling for sexually transmitted infections Counseling and screening for human immunodeficiency virus -LRB- HIV -RRB- Screening and counseling for interpersonal and domestic violence Breastfeeding support , supplies and counseling Generic formulary contraceptives are covered without member cost-share -LRB- for example , no copayment -RRB- . Certain religious organizations or religious employers may be exempt from offering contraceptive services . So unless youremployertakes arighteous moral stand then yes AETNA HEALTH PLANS WITHPRESCRIPTIONPLANS will .
Aetna is of excellent financial strength and personally a carrier I 've been placing clients in for years . They are rated A + on Standard & Poor 's and A with A.M. Best . That alone is a testament to their financial quality . Aside from the ratings , I have approx 250 individual clients placed on Aetna plans with little to no issues or problems . Excellent carrier that I highly recommend often . To get a quote with Aetna and other top rated carriers visit www.clminsure.com or call 561-320-2978
AARP is a marketing organization aimed at `` seniors '' aged 50 and older . AARP has endorsed health insurance plans , including major medical for those under age 65 . In some areas the endorsed plan is underwritten by Aetna in 2013 . Compared to the Aetna plans available in the open market , you have only a few choices . AARP plans are essentially identical to those you can purchase from an insurance agent . Premium savings on the AARP plans are illusory . In order to create a lower premium some benefits are stripped from the plan vs those available in market Aetna plans . Any time you are shopping for insurance you should compare rates and benefits across a wide spectrum and not just assume plans endorsed by a marketing association or retailer are lower priced and better values .
Generally AETNA health insurance plans cover acupuncture but only under specific circumstances -LRB- generally in lieu of using general anesthesia for a specific medical or dental procedure covered under the health insurance policy -RRB- and for relatively short list of medical situations such as lower back pain , migraines and a few other conditions . The list of conditions for which AETNA -LRB- or virtually any major medical insurance provider -RRB- will not cover acupuncture is far longer than the list of conditions that qualify . Before using acupuncture you should have your medical provider check with AETNA 's preauthorization department to determine if your specific condition will qualify for coverage and , if so , from what specific providers .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
I have worked alot with Aetna over the years , providing group health insurance benefits to small business groups . To the best of my knowledge , I have never personally heard of Aetna offering any form of long term care products . I know that they offer group health , group life , and group disability coverages .
I believe Costco does sell some health and life insurance in a few states through Aetna and Manufactures Life Insurance Co. . These have lower face amounts and lower terms like 5 to 10 years . I recommend if you need term life insurance use an experienced independent life insurance broker who can shop many companies to find the best term life at the best price for your unique situation . Be careful with one size fits all plans .
I have marketed Aetna health products for more than a decade , and have had fewer few complaints or problems from any of my customers . That side , when it comes to health insurance , there are always some complaints , most ofnte regarding premium increases . In that regard , in most states , Aetna 's history of increase tend to be comparable to other companies selling coverage in the same area . When seeking the best coverage for your personal situation , it is always best to contact an licensed , independent agent that works with all of the major companies in your area . Their service is free , and can help you save thousands of dollars in the very near future , especially if you have any major medical claims .
The term `` best '' is a subjective term . I do n't feel there are any `` best '' companies since most will pay their claims . A lot depends on the are you live in as far as what plans are offered . United Health Care is one of the largest in the world and is very competitive in most area 's . Humana has a good reputation as well as Aetna . Medical Mutual and Blue Cross are also very good . I look at the larger stable companies . There are some smaller companies that are good as well . No company is perfect and you will have complaints from friends and neighbors or the internet about all of them . My favorites would be United Health Care , Anthem Blue Cross -LRB- if available in your area -RRB- Medical Mutual , and Aetna .
Aetna does offer Life Insurance . However , on their website , Aetna states that the Life insurance coverage that they offer is available through employer-provided plans only . Their life insurance policies are not available to individuals for private sales . Aetna life insurance plans are called group term insurance or group coverage .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How To File An Automobile Insurance Claim ?
My best advice is to contact your agent if you have one . They can help facilitate the claim and get your car repaired and paid for quickly and arrange a rental car while yours is being repaired . If you bought coverage from a direct writer -LRB- Geico , Progressive etc -RRB- you need to call their claims dept whose phone number should be on the back of your insurance ID card .
Lets say you have a hundred friends and each has an automobile . If they could agree that they wanted to have enough money to pay legal expenses that they might have if they are responsible for an accident , you could form an insurance company . If you were able to determine -LRB- from actuarial studies -RRB- the amount of money you could anticipate spending in helping each other out in the coming year and the amount was $ 50,000 you would then know the basic share for each friend , $ 500 -LRB- $ 50,000 / 100 -RRB- Someone in your group will probably object because they only take their car to shows once or twice a year and certainly dont have the exposure the rest of the friends have . Another will object because they live on a farm and rarely drive into town -LRB- although it might be a long ways . -RRB- They will contend that their exposure is less than the other friends . Another friend will complain because one of the friends has a street-legal racing car and it is more likely that it will be involved in an accident . One of your friends has a drinking problem and no one really wants a share of his legal liability . And so it goes . What at one time seemed simple and logical becomes increasingly complex . Actuaries are a rare group of people who compile data and have the ability to slice that data in many different ways to determine the effects of the location where the car is garaged , average annual miles , credit risk of the owner , make , model and year of the vehicle . In fact , these actuaries can compute over 100 rating areas for an automobile . The point that this exercise makes is to distribute the risk that all of us face equitably . I have been asked if a red car costs more to insure than others . I am sure that a study somewhere has shown that red cars have a slightly higher than average accident rate . It is something that could be used in the rating process . I have been asked if a previously totaled car , now registered legally can be insured based upon that same concern for a fair premium . So actuaries give the insurance company many alternatives upon which they can design a rating scheme for an automobile . In my state the scheme is set by state law . Actually the California Constitution dictates how automobile policies will be rated . So legislative action can have a profound effect on automobile rating . Most states give authority to their insurance commissioner to regulate automobile insurance rates . Their charge is not so much to maintain fairness as it is to make sure that the companies take in enough premiums to pay the claims that are anticipated . In other words , the commissioner does everything in his or her power to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . Insurance companies keep very close tabs on the claims that they pay and the premiums that they take in . Actually the actuaries get involved in this as well , to determine if they are charging enough for every different type of coverage . When the company fails to receive enough premiums to pay all of the claims in a given year , they approach the commissioner and propose a rate increase . At this point the company has done everything possible to spread the risk appropriately , however , there are some areas that they want to adjust to make sure that the company is being fair and that the company can continue to keep its promises . That is how a company computes what it will charge you for your car .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
Automobile insurance covers an automobile so people dont need automobile insurance , automobiles do . Most states require coverage if the car is licensed . If it isnt licensed or operates on private property there isnt a legal requirement to insured the car . The problem is liability . An automobile is a 2000 pound missile that can maim and kill . Being responsible for that is an awesome thing . Automobile insurance almost always contains coverage in case your car hurts someone .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
The automobile is covered by an auto policy . This is a key issue . Regardless of the operator , the coverage is on the automobile . The primary and secondary policyholders are named and there is a very limited amount of liability coverage that extends if a policyholder is operating another car , owned by another insured and the claim exceeds the limits carried on that second automobile . Almost everything in the policy is focused on the named automobile .
In California the automobile is insured . The premium is based in part on the drivers in the household but it is the automobile that is the covered object . The automobile is insured as long as it is being operated by a licensed driver using the automobile with the permission of the owner . Any loss the driver sustains will be a mark against the automobile and could affect renewal premiums .
I not certain how having or not having automobile insurance would have an effect on renting a Uhaul trailer . If you are asking if your automobile insurance would extend to covering the rented Uhaul , the answer is maybe . Your automobile insurance liability coverage will typically travel with the insured not the vehicle , but comprehensive and collision coverage do not travel with the insured theyprovide coverage for thevehicle listed on the policy .
If the cost of auto repairs hasnt increased and damages awarded in lawsuits hasnt increased , auto insurance probably shouldnt increase . Your state insurance commissioner keeps a close eye on insurance cost in your states . He does this for two reasons . The first is to make sure that the public isnt being charged too much and the second is to make sure that the insurance companies are taking in sufficient money to honor all of the promises that they have made . The real cost of automobile insurance is determined when you have a claim . If the policy limit is exceeded and angry people are suing you , you paid too much for your insurance . If your policy had high limits and took care of everything , then you bought cheap insurance . Having to settle a claim out of your own pocket is the most expensive form of insurance that you can purchase . The reason that insurance premiums increase is that the company pays out more than it can afford to pay out . It is a simple balance sheet calculation . When the company finds that they are paying out more in claims than they are receiving in premiums they file with the state insurance commissioner to review and adjust rates in your state . Several things cause the claims experience of a company to increase . It could be that the frequency of claims increases . This could be the result of reduced safety enforcement , poorer road conditions or a variety of other causes . It could be that the severity of claims has increased . This would be the result of an increasing number of accidents turning into lawsuits . It also could be caused by juries making increasingly high awards to those injured in accidents . It also could be the result of increased medical costs in your area . Another factor could be the cost of auto repairs . Materials and parts tend to become more expensive over time and this could affect the claims experience of a company . It is important to note that most companies in the state will feel similar pressure at the same time as those factors affect all the companies . There are moral factors that also come to affect the premiums of auto insurance . When drivers report fewer annual miles than they actually drive , that increases their exposure without increasing the premium for their policy . If people allow other drivers to operate their vehicles without adequate supervision of screening risky drivers could be populating the streets . Even though your state requires that vehicles be insured we all know that some are not and that expense has to be shared somewhere . A frequent abuse is the pizza delivery man who is driving the family sedan . His insurance policy never knew he was doing that and has a risk that hasnt been properly evaluated . There are far more lurid cases but my all-time favorite is the family sedan that has steel tanks welded underneath the body to carry illegal liquor . All these moral issues also affect the premium .
Automobile insurance covers an automobile . Property is covered by property insurance . If the property is a part of the automobile it is covered under the automobile policy . State law may provide variations of coverage but this is the basic answer . You should know that property coverage outside the residence is normally only a percentage of the coverage listed on the policy and is subject to a deductible .
Full coverage means that your automobile is covered in the event of an accident or other covered peril . Collision covers your automobile in the event of a collision with a non animate object such as an automobile or other vehicle , or a tree or building . Comprehensive covers your automobile for anything other than a collision , such as an animal strike , hail damage , a tree limb falling on your auto , windshield damage , vandalism . or theft . Generally , these only cover up to the value of the vehicle depreciated for age .
Automobile insurance covers the car . If you have an automobile policy and are operating someone elses automobile , you might have some coverage , should the policy covering that auto be inadequate . It is difficult to think of a circumstance under which your comprehensive coverage would come into play because comprehensive usually indicates that the vehicle is not moving , so you couldnt be operating it . There might be some unusual circumstances but you should check with an agent , adjuster or claims representative .
When you rent a car you are responsible for any accident you might have with the car and are also responsible to return the car to the agency in the same condition as when you rented it . While the insurance offered by the rental company may be overpriced they do not do any of the underwriting and investigation of the driver that a normal insurance company will do . That makes their selection process less critical and their prices higher . The advantage of the insurance that they offer is that you can return the automobile or tell the company where the automobile is located and the insurance that you purchased from them will complete your contract with the rental company -LRB- that is not a legal opinion , just an observation . -RRB- The coverage on your current automobile extends to a car that you have rented . If you have inadequate coverage on your private automobile you will have inadequate coverage on the rental car . If you are involved in an accident the rental company will try to keep the meter running on the rental agreement if you dont have their insurance .
Absolutely . Renters Insurance is often extended to things like storage units , automobiles , property in your luggage while you are on a trip . Many people are unaware of this and therefore usually end up with a loss not knowing that they could file a claim . Please contact me for more information
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
Damage to an automobile that is not the result of a collision is known as a comprehensive loss . If you have that coverage it would not pay for sun damage which is the result of long term exposure to the sun . The principle is that the company will return the car to the condition it was in before the event after satisfying the deductible . If you file a claim for sun damage on Tuesday , the company would be obligated to return it to the condition it was in on Monday .
Personal automobile insurance is car insurance in general . Personal automobile insurance can cover just liability or you can cover your own car as well with physical damage . Auto insurance is required by law and there are state minimum coverage limits vary by state . Personal automobile insurance will cover autos owned by individuals instead of a commercial auto policy that covers commercial autos .
Car insurance was not invented by a lizard . A principle behind insurance , any insurance , is shared risk . Insurance was being written before the invention of the automobile . Ships were insured . Because both an automobile and a ship move and carry things the transition was simple . In more recent times there has been a continuous effort to have auto policies issued by various companies provide the same basic coverages . So you could say that auto insurance is still being invented as automobiles change and the environment in which they operate changes .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Provides The Best Long Term Care Insurance ?
There are many top-rated carriers that provide affordable , but quality long-term insurance coverage . The key is finding an experienced full-time broker -LRB- or financial planner -RRB- that will help you compare your best options . Your budget , health , and other factors will be taken into consideration and you 'll be working with the best available resource . Part-time employees , radio/tv/media workers and unaffiliated and uninterested persons can not provide the expert guidance that you need .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Under Medicare any type of Home Health Care is limited . They will provide some skilled care on a temporary basis but Medicare generally will not pay for custodial care in any long term care environment . That is why it is important to carry some type of Long Term Care Insurance that will provide Home Health Care . Some policies even pay family members for providing care . A good agent who does long term care planning can help you find a program that will help .
Long Term Disability and Long Term Care have similar names , so it is easy to see how they can be confused . Long Term Disability is for those who are employed , and the benefit they receive would replace part of the income lost by suffering a long term disability . Long Term Care is for those who are in need of skilled care , and the benefit received either goes straight to the institution providing the care , or to the person receiving the care , to use as they wish .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
The best Long Term Care insurance for one person may not be the best Long Term Care policy for another . Look at the rating of the company and the features of the policies they offer , in addition to see if they are priced competitively , their history of rate increases , and whether they have had many complaints against them . Above all , it is helpful to contact a Long Term Care broker -LRB- may Life insurance brokers also sell Long Term Care insurance -RRB- to help you find the best Long Term Care policy for you .
In all honesty , Long Term Care Insurance is not important for everyone . If you have very few assets and low income , you may sacrifice to pay Long Term Care premiums for extended care that may or may not be needed , and that Medicaid could cover if needed . If being able to choose your own place and type of extended care is important to you , then Long Term Care Insurance is a great thing to own even with low assets , as long as you can afford to pay the premiums . Long Term Care Insurance is most important for those who have an estate to protect . If you have saved up to pass an inheritance to your loved ones , or wish to pass a business to a successor , your intentions could be jeopardized if you were to to need care for an extended period of time . Long Term Care can pay that for you and allow your estate to remain untouched .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How Much Long Term Care Insurance Is Needed ?
Most Americans have finally come to terms that they will be living longer and require some help in their senior years . Long term care needs to cover assisted living and/or nursing home care generally during retirement . Those costs can be daunting . So it 's important to purchase the maximum coverage . A male non smoker age 60 in good health may pay around $ 300 a month for $ 7000 a month benefits to a limitation of $ 420,000 .
How much long term care coverage is required ? It will depend on the cost of care where you will receive it . You can find online information that will let you see the cost of care in your state . That will help you figure what you will need for costs . You can also find the average duration a person stays under care . This will help with figuring out how long you 'll need coverage . There is a lot of information to help you create a plan that will provide a solid level of coverage and duration without breaking you financially .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Renters Belongings ?
If you are renting a portion of a home occupied by the insured most companies will not cover your property unless you are named as an insured on the policy . If you are a guest in the home , the insured has the option to extend coverage to your personal property . If you are renting a residence , your property would not be covered . This is what a tenants policy is designed to do , cover your risks while you are occupying a rented residence .
While the property of a domestic employee or guest may be covered , the property of a tenant or renter isnt . The renter can secure a policy of their own that will cover their property . These policies are relatively inexpensive and also provide liability coverage should the renter be sued for bodily injury or property damage .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Great question ! Most folks know the importance of homeowners insurance , but few people realize all of the benefits and coverage available with a renter 's insurance policy . Coverage options differ between insurance companies , but here is a quick list of items that are typically covered : 1 . It covers replacing all of your belongings , including furniture , clothes , shoes , tools , laptops , and TVs after a covered loss . -LRB- Many people incorrectly assume that if they are renting , their personal belongings are covered under the property owner 's insurance policy ; in most cases the renter 's belongings are not covered under the owner 's policy . -RRB- 2 . It covers medical costs for guests who may be injured in your home . -LRB- Perhaps the neighbor sprained their ankle falling off of your step ? Wouldnt it be nice to cover their medical expenses as a courtesy , and not have to pay out of your own pocket ? -RRB- 3 . It gives you liability protection for events you may be held liable for on or off the property . -LRB- Maybe the neighbor who sprained their ankle decides to sue you ? -RRB- 4 . It covers additional living expenses , such as a hotel room , and dining out in the event you are temporarily evacuated from your home . -LRB- Perhaps a pipe bursts , and the landlord says you have to stay somewhere else for 10 days while they conduct repairs ? -RRB-
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
Great question ! You have asked about something that has been the heartbreak of many a renter . The answer is no , it does not . What the landlord 's insurance will cover is what belongs to the landlord , not you . So if the home were to catch on fire , the landlords insurance would pay for the home . Your things that were inside the home do not belong to him , therefore the company would not pay you for them . Please look into a renters policy to protect your belongings . If you need help , please contact me , I 'm glad to help . Thanks for asking !
That depends upon two things really . First , the type of housing you are in and second the terms and conditoins of your parents ' Homeowners Insurance policy . Let 's talk about the second one first . If your Insurance Professional advises you that your parents ' Homeowners ' policy provides extended coverage that is adiquate to cover your personal belongings in an on campus dorm , then in that case , it is not critical that you obtain a separate renters insurance policy . If the Homeowners policy does not provide this extension or , more commonly , if you are housed in off campus rental unit or house , then obtaining a renters insurance policy would not only be smart , it may also be required by the buildng owner or management company from whom you are renting .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
A standard Renters Insurance policy does not cover the peril of earthquake . Renters Insurance will protect the insured 's personal belongings up to the policy limits provided . Some insurance carriers in various States will allow the addition of an Endorsement to include the peril of earthquake to the policy thereby including protection to your personal belongings that may be damaged by an Earthquake .
Tenants should always have coverage because the dwelling policy the owner of the property will take out does not cover the tenants belongings . Policies a very affordable and as a tenant they can choose the amount of coverage they want to carry . Coverage for their belongings as well as liability in the event someone is injured and Pursues them legally . In the event a water heater breaks , roof leaks , a/c damages their belongings the renter could look toward their personal home policy .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
That is a great question ! You can not be forced to get renters insurance , but the landlord can make it a requirement for you to be able to rent from them . You can always choose to rent somewhere else . But I 'd want you to think about it for a second . Why should you have it ? The landlord has insurance , but it does n't cover any of your belongings . If your apartment caught on fire , His insurance would cover the building repairs , but you and your neighbors ' belongings are another story . And the liability for the fire may leave you open to a lawsuit for the repair bill . Renters insurance is relatively cheap , and can save both you , and your landlord , a ton of grief . That 's why they want you to have it . If you would like some tips on what to look for , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
You can certainly get renters insurance to cover belongings in a dorm room , but you probably do n't need it . Most college students would be covered by their parents homeowners policy when they leave for college , so renters insurance would n't be necessary . I would recommend you have your parents check with their agent and make sure , but nearly every homeowners policy would have this coverage .
Renters policies are essentially the same type of policy as a regular homeowners adjusted to deal with property and liability exposures for a person who rents as opposed to some one who owns a property . So , the biggest property exposure for a renter is typically the '' contents '' that belong to you . A key issue to be aware of is that losses can be settled on both an actual cash value basis , or replacement cost basis . Replacement cost will be more expensive , but the actual cash value of things is depreciating every day you own it . For example look at the computer you are using . Compare it to ones in use 20 years ago . If you have one of the dinosaurs do n't expect to get much for its actual cash value since is essentially depreciated to zero . The other major group of coverages is called Section II of most renters policies and this offers you protection from claims or law suits alleging that you caused others some bodily injury or property damage to others . An easy example to understand is dog bites which are often the second leading cause of homeowner losses for a carrier . If your dog bites somebody it is not going to matter to an individual or the courts whether you own or rent your residence . Essentially you look to your renters policy for not only the coverage but also very importantly the defense costs associated with defending you from such allegations .
The cost does depend on the area you live in and there are some companies that do consider your payment history in the pricing . Insurance companies give better rates for better credit many times . In Texas we see the same rates as Drew Overman shared $ 100 - $ 300 for the entire year . This covers your belongings for theft , fire or if water damage to your belongings is caused perhaps from someone living above you . It does not cover your belongings in case of a flood-you need flood insurance for that .
Most people consider purchasing renter 's insurance to cover their personal belongings - most renter 's policies will pay for the loss of personal property due to theft , vandalism , fire , etc. . However , a renter 's policy can also provide coverage if you are personally liable for injury to another person or damage to their property due to a non-vehicle related incident . In addition , a renter 's policy may also pay for `` loss of use '' due to a covered loss , meaning if you are forced to temporarily relocate due to said loss , there may be coverage for related expenses . Renter 's insurance is typically very affordable . Premiums can vary from one person to another , and some companies may offer better prices than others depending on your location , but I 've seen renter 's policies as low as $ 9 or $ 10/month . Please bear in mind that there are a lot of variables that affect your rate , and you may or may not be able to find renter 's insurance for this kind of price .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can I Deduct Disability Insurance Premiums From My Taxes ?
In most cases , you can not deduct Disability Insurance premiums from your taxes . However , if there is a need to use your Disability Insurance policy to pay an income to you during a period of disability , the benefit you receive will not be taxable as you paid taxes on the money going into the policy . Consult a tax attorney for specific situations .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Disclaimer : The following answer is not to be considered tax advice . Contact a qualified tax professional before making any financial decision . Yes , long-term care premium payments may be tax deductible . It depends on the tax status of the individual or business entity filing an IRS tax report . The IRS annually publishes the limits on the amount of premium that can be entered into the tax return and where to enter that amount for consideration of tax deductibility . For non-business consideration , that would currently be `` Medical expenses '' in Schedule A . If by adding the allowable portion of the LTCi premium to Medical expenses causes the total amount of medical expenses to exceed the threshold -LRB- formerly 7.5 % of AGI , going forward 10 % of AGI -RRB- , then the amount beyond that threshold may be deductible . If not , then the allowable portion of the LTCi premium would not qualify for deduction . For business consideration , the portion of the premium allowable for possible tax deductibility is usually reported on Schedule C . At the present time , only a C-corporation may have 100 % of the LTCi premium considered for deductibility . The allowable amounts of LTCi premium for tax deductible consideration are age-based . For insured-ages 40 and under , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 360 . For those ages 71 and over , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 4550 . Between that minimum and maximum are various age brackets with different allowable amounts . Those amounts will be adjusted for income-tax-year 2014 and each year thereafter , under current tax law . Tax preparers , accountants , tax attorneys , and tax-preparation software are informed and are updated for each tax year .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Disability insurance can count as taxable income or it can be tax free . The simple way to determine if disability income benefits are going to be taxed or not is by determining who pays the premiums ? If you have your disability through an employer who pays your premiums and deducts them from the company taxes , then yes your disability benefits are taxed as income . If you purchase disability insurance and you pay the premiums which are not tax deductible then your disability benefits are tax free . Always consult a professional tax advisor as well when it comes to your taxes .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
Deducting your healthcare premiums is not only possible , but makes financial sense . I 'll use myself as an example . I have been an insurance broker for 33 years so there may not be a better resource . I own an HSA -LRB- along with the High-Deductible-Health-Plan -RRB- and have been a supporter of this type of policy for many years . Although I may file my taxes differently than yourself , I am able to deduct a portion of the premiums along with the proceeds that are deposited into the HSA . A self-employed person can deduct health insurance on their taxes in a number of ways . However , whether you use Turbo-Tax or simply complete your own tax return without help , it s always wise to consult a tax expert or the IRS website regarding deductibility of health insurance . And remember that premiums and actual expenses may be treated differently as well persons that itemize vs. not itemizing .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
In Canada , disability insurance payments are usually structured so that the payment is tax free . This applies to individual plans as well as group plans . The basic principle is , if the premium is paid with after tax dollars , then the benefit is tax free . If the premium is deducted as an expense -LRB- employee benefit -RRB- , then the benefit payment is taxable . That is why with group insurance plans the premium split is structured so that the employee pays the Long Term Disability -LRB- LTD -RRB- portion of the premium . This is done to keep the benefit tax free . Plans can be structured to provide a benefit to employees with the company paying the premium on the policies and deducting it as an expense . Certain rules need to be followed . Here is an overview : Company pays premium for coverage , gets the deduction , employee does not pay tax on the premium `` benefit '' , but any disability benefit is taxable . In order to offset the income tax , the amount of coverage the employee is permitted to apply for is increased . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Yes , many long term care insurance premiums can be deducted on income tax as a medical expense . The plans must be qualified LTCI plans . The Long Term Care Federal Tax Deductible Limits for 2013 are itemized on IRS Revenue Procedure : 2012-41 . These limits are age based . Here are how some of the deductions work . 1 -RRB- Working for someone else : Only the portion of total medical expenses that exceeds your adjusted gross income by 7.5 % can be deducted , using Schedule A on your tax return . If your employer pays the full LTCI premium , your employer may deduct the total expense . 2 -RRB- Self employed : The entire premium of you , spouse and dependents -LRB- up to federal age based limits -RRB- can be deducted on line 29 of tax form 1040 . 3 -RRB- C Corporation : 100 % of premium is deductible for employee , spouse and dependents with no age based limits on premium . 4 -RRB- State income tax deductions and/or credits 5 -RRB- Paying premium with HSA .
If you dont deduct your disability insurance premium as a business expense , your disability benefits are tax free . But if you do deduct your disability insurance premium , then your disability benefits are taxable at ordinary income tax rates . The advantage of the deduction is the disability insurance company will cover up to 80 % of your compensation , compared to 60 % if you dont deduct it . You need to determine you effective tax bracket rate to analyze which is better for your situation .
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Will My Renters Insurance Cover My Dog ?
Will assume that you are referring to damage done by your dog . If he or she damages your property , there is probably no coverage . However , if the dog tears into the property of others , there would probably be coverage . However , there is a limit to the amount of liability coverage provided .
That is a great question ! You will need to check with your agent for the specifics of your policy , but typically renters insurance policies have a limited amount of coverage they will provide . For injury to , or the death ofyour dog , there is n't coverage , unfortunately . If your dog does damage to your apartment , or your belongings , again there is no coverage . If your dog bites someone , there may be some coverage , depending upon the type of dog you have . Some companies will not insure certain breeds that are deemed to be aggressive . You will really need to ask your agent to know for sure . Thanks for asking !
As was said by my colleague , it is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . But unless there is some coverage limitation or exclusion in your policy based upon having a dog or a specific breed of dog , then if your dog happens to bite another person or another person 's pet , the liability portion of your renters ' policy will cover you for any legal liability you may have .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
In New York , one of the standard exclusions under the property coverages is something along the lines of ` animals , birds , and fish . ' If youown a valuable dog , a ` canine mortality ' policy would be appropriate to insure the value of the animal . There are also health insurance policies available for dogs . If you meant to ask ` Are dog bites/attacks and/or damage done by my dog covered underthe personal liabilityy section of a renters policy ? ' , the answer depends on a reading of your policy . Many carriers have a ` dog exclusion ' endorsement which voids liability for either all owned dogs or specific breeds . A competent agent or broker should -LRB- as a standard procedure -RRB- assess/survey your hazards and include questions to you about owned animals -LRB- especially dogs -RRB- as many carriers will not accept as new risks those individuals owning certain breeds of dogs . Always determine prior to purchase that the insurance policy you wish to purchase provides coverage for your exposures ; if the policy covers the liability exposure of the animals you own . If the policy application contains questions about animals , make sure they are answered completely and truthfully , you sign the application , and you retain a copy of the application -LRB- or anything else you sign - always and without fail -RRB- . If you can not obtain a copy , do not complete the transaction .
Renters Insurance in the US is an outgrowth of the regular Homeowners Insurance policies that have been in use in many states since the mid 20th Century . In fact for many companies the forms in use continue to be variations -LRB- with appropriate state approvals -RRB- of forms developed by the Insurance Service Office , ISO . The Insurance Service Office is not alone in developing contractual homeowners and subsequently renters policy forms in use in the various states . There are other product development groups and larger companies often develop their own product offerings . With all that said , there are some common elements to homeowner and renters policy and by far the use of annual -LRB- 12 month terms predominates -RRB- . Decades ago there were companies using forms that lasted as much as three years for homeowners , but the reality of getting appropriate approvals from the regulators , responding to loss results and getting mortgage companies to accept the policies has all led to a fairly standardized approach in the US that homeowners and renters policies are primarily annual contracts . But do n't throw away all your old policies when you get to the end of a year if you are all aware of an event that might give rise to coverage during that time period . For example suppose during the term of your renters policy your dog bit a neighbor . That occurrence then would be associated with the payment of loss for the infliction of bodily injury even though the damage is only assessed completely for years to come . Her is why I mention dog bites . In many states you have absolute liability for your dog 's aggression . And , dogs who maul a victim are often attacking children -LRB- easier prey to the dog -RRB- and the damages are usually to the child 's head . Therefore as they age there can be a need for repeated surgeries to address the scaring . Since the renters policy is typically an occurrence policy , the policy which will respond is not the current insurer several years out , but the insurer at the time of the event or '' occurrence ''
The answer is typically yes , but there are some Caveats > The typical renters policy is based on the ISO , Insurance Service Office developed HO 4 policy . So in effect a renters policy is more or less a homeowners policy without the house . Renters policies typically have a Section Two Liability Coverage which you review as to the limit of coverage and if there any significant restriction . Since dog bites are increasingly a major frequency issue for insurers , some have taken the position of carving out a restriction of coverage if certain dogs , dog breeds or size does not meet their standards . In Canada their are some Provinces have determined certain breeds to be against public policy and while they have not gone to putting down any dog of those breeds , but have taken the position that no new dog of certain breeds can be housed in that Province .
As was said by my colleague , it is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . But unless there is some coverage limitation or exclusion in your policy based upon having a dog or a specific breed of dog , then if your dog happens to bite another person or another person 's pet , the liability portion of your renters ' policy will cover you for any legal liability you may have .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Dog bites would be covered under the liability portion of your homeowners policy . Dog bites have become a big deal over the last several years and dog bite can be a very expensive loss in some cases . For this reason many insurance companies have put exclusions on certain breeds of dogs and will not cover a dog bite . You would need to check with your specific insurance company to see if your breed of dog is covered should a dog bit occur . All agents should be having this discussion with the client before purchasing a policy .
Most companies have a prohibited dog list . If you have one of these dogs listed below most home insurance companies will either not write the policy or issue a notice of non-renewal if discovered . If you have an animal liability endorsement , the coverage more than likely will not cover any prohibitive dog claim . Animal liability or `` dog bite '' liability will cover your dog that is not on any prohibitive list and has no bite history . Take a look at the list from one of the companies we represent . Akitas American Bulldogs Beaucerons Caucasian Mountain Dogs Chow Chow Doberman Pinschers German Shephards Great Danes Pit Bulls Rottweilers Staffordshire Terriers Wolf Hybrids This not a general list for all homeowners insurance companies . Each company may have their own list of prohibitive dog breeds . If you own a dog , it is best you first check your policy to determine if your homeowners policy covers any animal liability claim and if so , what is the sublimit of liability ?
Pet liability is a big issue and generally when the question is asked it pertains to a dog . Most renters insurance willexcludecertain types of dogs if they bit someone . Theseparticulardogs but not limited to are pit bulls , boxers , Akita , rottweilers , chows , and maybe more . It is very important you speak with a local agent on this issue about the breed of dog you own and if your renters insurance would protect you in the event of a dog bite .
Depends on several factors including the State involved , the relative underwriting policies of the various carriers and the breed of dog . Since there are more than 4.5 million dog bites each year in the U.S. with more than 50 % of them occurring on the dog owners ' premises , it is easy to see why this can be a huge issue with regard to dog ownership and homeowner insurance coverage . The liability coverage supplied in homeowners and renters policies is at risk depending on these factors . In most States , it depends on the breed of dog . Be upfront with a prospective or existing insurance carrier . Some carriers will increase your rates if you are an existing customer and others may refuse you as a customer . Others may be precluded from doing so , based on State regulations . Your agent can help you with this process and should be able to tell you the position of each carrier with regard to your specific breed of dog .
When purchasing renters insurance you want to be very clear in disclosing the breed of dog you own . Many insurance carriers will exclude certain breeds of dog and failure to disclose can get your claim denied . While dog bits can be covered it is very important to have a discussion with your agent about your breed of dog .
The major issue , of course is for possibly obtaining liability coverage for physical damage caused by these types of dogs . I had my doubts as to the availability of this coverage but was advised that there is a website for Pit Bulls owners that discusses some relative items . It actually lists several companies that may insure Pit Bulls and some other breeds of certain controversial nature . Other renters ' issues are also addressed . Check out saveabull . com The article is entitled ; ` Insurance for Pit Bulls ' . It is mentioned that the availability of coverage for these types of dogs may restricted by regions .
If your asking does renters insurance cover your dog biting or attacking someone the answer would be yes unless there is a dog exclusion on your policy . Also there are certain dogs an insurance company will not take if you own when you started the policy . If you did not disclose your breed of dog this could be seen as misrepresentation and the claim may not be paid .
Expensive is a relative term to the person using it . Based on my limited experience within my geographic location ; renters insurance is typically very inexpensive . I would say based on my experience that an average renters insurance policy in my area is around ten dollars per month and if you have your renters and auto coverage with the same carrier you will typically receive additional discounts . If you feel the rate for your renters insurance is too high call some other local agents in your area to receive quotes from other carriers for the coverage you seek .
There are several ways that you can purchase a renters policy . If you search the internet you will find some websites that will actually quote and issue a renters policy . The problem you face with this approach is that a policy is selected to pay your damages when you suffer a loss may be inadequate . It is quite likely that when you actually suffer that loss you will find that you are not sufficiently insured . Then the insurance policy you have been paying on becomes the most expensive policy that you could have purchased because it wont cover your loss . The better approach is to engage an insurance agent . You may not know an agent . Get recommendations from your neighbors , friends and colleagues . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . You really want everyone to be on the same page at the time of a loss . The agent will probably start by asking you the value of your personal property . To prepare for that question , I suggest that you take pictures of everything that you own . You can store that valuable record off site in case of a loss . Review the pictures and make an estimate of the cost to replace everything that you own . The sum of those estimates determines the value you need to set on your renters policy . Remember that you are looking at replacement value , not current value . In this process you might have property that is subject to internal limits within the policy . You need to specify the replacement value of any jewelry , guns , computer equipment , and collectibles . There are other classes of property that warrant special attention . Ask the agent about any unusual property that might be in your possession . The next thing that the agent will discuss is the liability limit . Insist on the highest limit that the agent can write . You can never have enough liability insurance . This protects you by providing for your defense and any awards against you up to the limits of the policy . You want these limits to be very high . A lawsuit can ruin your life . If you have a pet make sure that the agent knows about the pet . This is particularly important if you own a dog . Policies often have greatly reduced liability limits for dogs and may exclude all coverage for dogs of certain breeds or with a history of biting . This is a major source of claims . If you have a trampoline on the property makes sure that the agent knows that as well . Often owning a renters policy is a requirement of a lease . In those cases the landlord generally wants to be named as an additional insured . You need to have his or her name and address to provide to the agent . Incidentally , this is a reasonable requirement of the landlord and might be required by his or her insurance company . The final piece of information has to do with any losses that you might have previously suffered either at the unit you are currently renting or another unit . The information should be as detailed as possible to assist in underwriting your application .
Your best bet is to call the company directly and ask the question . Availability of liability coverage for dog bites is in a state of flux these days . Some companies exclude all or some breeds of dogs , some will offer a policy with a dog exclusion only if there has been any bite history . And when/if you find a company that will cover the dog , you can be certain that if there is an incident a dog exclusion or policy cancellation will follow . It is unfortunate but some breeds have a bad reputation because in many cases the owners should never have been allowed the privilege of dog ownership .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Get Car Insurance Online ?
Yes the internet is flooded with thousands of insurance companies , insurance brokers , agents offering auto insurance rates online . It just takes a few minutes and few clicks on the mouse . The best thing about getting auto insurance is the competition among the carriers . Because of such competition , many of them offer the cheapest auto insurance rates for you . Shopping for the best auto insurance rates on the internet allows you the option whether or not to talk to an agent as well . Make sure when online have your old policy ready so you can refer to it for some of the questions you will have to answer . When buying a policy online or offline make sure you fully disclose your driving record . In some States while youre at it , check your credit score . Some auto insurance companies will not run your driving record at the time of purchase but they will run it on the back end and once they find out about your driving history and your credit , your rates will increase . So do the research before you buy .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Your insurance is only as good as your agent . An Agent can provide you personal service as most online carriers you can not get this type of service . In many cases you can get a better rate from an agent because they listen to you and what our needs and make sure you are properly covered . I have thousands of time Beat the online rate with the same carrier even . It really comes down to personal preference . Some say they like the online because it is 24/7 That is ok also But our clients We personally answer the phone 24/7 I can count on 1 hand how many times a client has ever had to leave a voicemail . If your looking for just numbers and no service then by all means online is the way to go just make sure that you are properly covered and also make sure that they can even sell insurance in your state . I ca n't begin to count how many people I know that have purchased online because a of a banner ad they clicked or got in their email and purchased coverage then found out later after a claim that that carrier is not allowed to even sell in our state hence no coverage and out of the money they spent on a policy . Or worse yet bought a policy online and it was not even a real company now days the scammers are out there buyer beware .
When you go to buy a life insurance policy online , you will run into a number of options . From the most to least automated , here are some of them . 1 -RRB- You put your information into an online application and your policy is issued within minutes . I have seen these websites come and go and am not sure how many exist online at this time . Premiums are comparatively high because they do little to no medical underwriting , and everyone may be lumped together at the same price . It puts a lot of responsibility on the individual to read the fine print . 2 -RRB- You enter your information online and get a quote . At this time , you fill out an application with an agent over the phone , or fill out the app online and then do a phone interview with the life insurance company . Because this type of policy digs a little deeper , premiums are more competitive . I like this option for people who are in a hurry or who hate to fill out paperwork . I do recommend at least talking to an agent before filling out the application with the company , as an agent can steer you in another direction if there is something in your profile that would cause you to be declined or rated up . 3 -RRB- You get a quote online , then email or talk to an agent to determine whether that is your best rate . Then you are mailed or emailed an application that you can complete and fax , mail or email back . There may or may not be an exam involved . At the end , you have a policy just like you would have had if you had gone to a local insurance office . This is a good choice for large face amounts and for people with health conditions . It allows us agents to be involved from the get go so that we can prevent problems and make sure the policy is issued at your best possible rate . The best part about buying life insurance online is being able to do it all from the comfort and convenience of your home . You can make it as automated or personal as you like . I hope the above helps you determine what option is best for you .
Yes you can apply for life insurance online . The life insurance industry is going through a very trying transition right now . The average career life insurance agent right now is over 50 years of age and the total number of agents is quickly declining . This is happening because more people like you are looking for life insurance online . The important thing for anyone who is a just starting the life insurance process to consider is that your buying experience will certainly be very different if you buy life insurance online versus contacting a local agent . Not better or worse , but different . Thinking about how you prefer to do business may help you decide which route to take . Are you part of the connected generation ? If your average day includes texting and Skype or FaceTime you will be perfectly comfortable buying your life insurance online . Do n't be concerned that you will be stuck with some impersonal call center . There are plenty of great online insurance agents that provide personal service . The only difference between them and your local agent is that your communication will be via your smart phone , not in person . If you 're not into the latest technology and you feel that personal interaction requires a handshake , you probably wo n't be comfortable getting life insurance online . You may find the process cold and impersonal . Do n't worry . Even though they 're getting older , there are plenty of great local life insurance agents that will give you advice and personal service your way . Many of them still make house calls and transact business over your kitchen table . The most important thing is not where you get life insurance , it 's that you do get life insurance . Good luck to you whichever route you choose :-RRB-
You can easily buy car insurance online and you may save a substantial amount of premium . Rates are usually regulated by the State Department Of Insurance , so an online broker 's rates can not be beat ! As an experienced broker with a top-rated website , we understand how confusing , frustrating and time-consuming it can be to shop for auto insurance online.You will find that claims are handled very efficiently by brokers and Agencies with experience in that field . I base that statement on 32 years of experience . Remember ... when you purchase online , it 's the SAME coverage and benefits you get by going directly to an agent that sells you a policy from that same carrier . The online method is quick and efficient and your paperwork is easy to read and understand . Once again , based on 32 years of experience in the business , I make that statement . By shopping , comparing , and researching all of the major insurers , consumers can pay less for their coverage with reputable companies . There are often many other discounts available that can potentially save hundreds of dollars per year . When you shop with an experienced broker and their website , you save ! Reviewing and comparing benefits helps you find the best policy available in your area . If you prefer working with a local broker , just make certain they are VERY experienced and can shop all of the major carriers for you . Either method will get you competitive pricing .
Shop , shop around . Shop online and over the phone to get the lowest rates possible . Buying auto insurance online is becoming more popular because of the convenience and flexibility it offers . Also calling auto insurance agencies are a great way as well ; some agents will shop multiple companies over the phone and give you the lowest price and you can purchase right on the spot . There are many service providers available online which makes it easy to get your automobile insured without even moving out of your home . The online agency provides all the relevant information necessary for the process and also provides an instant comparison of insurance rates from various service providers at a glance . You can save time and effort that you would have to otherwise spend on doing the research yourself or going out . Online or over the phone is a great way to save and find the cheapest auto insurance quote .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Of course you can buy insurance online but make sure that you are covered properly and that the carrier is allowed to sell in your state . I have seen many clients buy online thinking they have something and then have a loss and find out that they did n't have the coverage they needed . A local agent can also quote you and many times be less then the online quote . I have personally quoted with the same carrier as an online and beat the rates that they had been quoted with better coverage . Also some agencies like our is available 24/7 you always speak to you agent check and see what your coverage 's that you selected online and then call and agent to make sure your covered right and a good agent will tell you if the rates is right and the coverage is right
You can apply for life insurance online in several ways . Sometimes you can fill out the entire application online . More commonly , you find a quote online , then an agent contacts you to be sure you qualify for that quote . Sometimes agents can even find you a lower quote than what you found on their own website . That personal contact can help in many ways , so do n't shy away if you are contacted after attempting to apply online . One phone call can be all it takes to get you on the road with the right application , and after that you may never need to speak to the agent again .
You can apply for car insurance online with some , but not all companies . Often the carriers offering online applications , however , may have a higher rate than others . To compare the lowest car insurance rates online , use an experienced broker that will be able to shop for the best rate and coverage , and explain what options are best for you . Depending on where you live or the type of vehicle you drive , you may save quite a bit of money .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
If your car is considered totaled then a good indicator would go look at NADA > com or Kelly blue book online this would be a close estimate as to what they will give you now if you decided to keep the car you can do that also but you will get less cash for your car from the claim . Another way you can do this is make sure that you know the value of your auto you can call car dealerships and they can tell you what the car was worth prior to the accident . Insurance is to indemnify not to put you ahead . What you think your car is worth may not be as much as an adjuster thinks so be prepared and have a realistic value for your auto . Also if you had optional permanently attached equipment make sure that your policy had that listed or you may not get the value of that included . Hope this helps My best suggestion is to talk to you agent they should be able to help you with determining the value .
There is no price advantage to buying online as rates are regulated . Often times you are on your own in choosing coverage 's and assuming most who purchase on line are not insurance experts I recommend you consult with an agent before making a purchase . Believe me , I have seen declarations pages from those who have purchased on line and it can be scary to say the least . If you do like to purchase online you also have the fun of dealing with a claim online . For comparisons research online is great . Other then that I suggest you find a local independent agent who can look at multiple companies and advise to the best coverage 's and premiums for your needs .
Homeowners Insurance Online can be purchased online from HDA Insurance Brokerage ; a processor for major National underwriters in all 50 States . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
It is best to obtain a Free #HomeInsurance quote online and then apply to purchase your Homeowners Insurance directly online . Stillwater Insurance Group provides an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Where we may find it difficult to define ` Best ' Renters Insurance ; we believe the best renters insurance would be the most comprehensive coverage for a competitive premium rate . We believe in most States , this coverage lies in the hands of Renters Insurance Online available through Stillwater Insurance Group . We have an Online Link for consumers to obtain a quote , choose options and purchase the insurance policy online . If the definition of ` Best ' is ` Cheapest ' ; the easiest method to generate a Cheap Renters Insurance quote is to select a low amount of coverage with a high deductible . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States at : WEBSITELINK
I can see we have some conflicting opinions here , which is healthy ! I can not imagine that there are any life insurance companies who do not use computers to store their data about their customers , in this day and age . They are able to protect it through elaborate security measures . In the same way , online agencies can employ top notch security measures to protect their clients ' information . E.g. . In our office , the security is set up for multiple businesses , and our IT is extremely advanced . You should take safety into consideration when buying online . You should also take into consideration the credentials of the agent you are working with . Many online agents are working out of offices and simply using the internet to give their customers what they want : a convenient way to do business . People do not have to sacrifice safety , good service , and helpful professional advice to shop for life insurance online . They just have to select the right websites .
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Much Will Medicare Rise ?
Every year Congress decides how much of tax revenues to allocate for Medicare spending . They also set the deductibles for the coming year as well as premiums for Part A and Part B . This is all done under a full moon at midnight following the swinging of a dead chicken over their head ceremony . Seriously , there is no predicting what Congress will do since it is based on political whim and has nothing to do with inflation , costs or anything else . Over the last few years deductibles and premiums have risen 4 - 6 % which is an effective cost to you of 8 - 12 % .
The cost of Medicare will almost certainly go up in 2014 . The cost of health care is rising , the population is aging and not getting any healthier . In addition , utilization of medical services continues to rise at a staggering rate . Unless Congress yields to political pressure , you should anticipate your Medicare Part A and Part B deductibles to rise along with your Part B premium . The only remaining question is , how much will these costs rise ?
YES , in the aggregate sense . Perhaps for some individuals or groups their particular situation will allow them to benefit from the changes in rating methods and benefits required by the Affordable Care Act . But for most individuals and groups I am entirely comfortable in predicting higher health insurance costs . First of all , the underlying cost of health care services continues to rise . As these costs rise the cost of insuring these services must rise accordingly , this has been the case throughout my 30 years in the health insurance industry . Secondly , we are beginning to get a picture of what the enrollment composition in the individual health insurance marketplaces is looking like . As predicted by many industry professionals , the enrollment is skewing towards an older and sicker population with the highly desired young and healthy population largely remaining on the sidelines . Just today one of nation 's largest pharmacy management companies reported their preliminary analysis of the prescription utilization of marketplace enrollees vs their pre-health care reform population . Usage of expensive prescription medications for serious chronic health problems is 47 % higher , and this is just based on a couple of months of utilization data ! While some hold out the hope that the people who waited until the last moment to enroll were disproportionately young and healthy , my own experience enrolling people gives little indication that this was the case . So , the table has been set for adverse selection -LRB- more sick than healthy enrollees -RRB- in the health insurance pool , especially for the insurance carriers who elected to participate in the government health insurance marketplaces . This can not help but translate into higher health insurance costs for 2015 and in many areas of the country this will translate into very significant double digit increases in individual and small group health insurance . This has already been broadly hinted at by all the major health insurance carriers , it 's really not a question of `` if '' but just `` how much '' .
Lesson One A Simple Lesson on How the S&P 500 Works -LRB- Since the AP Has No Clue -RRB- Oct. 4 , 2010 4:34 AM ET | 15 comments | About : SPDR S&P 500 Trust ETF -LRB- SPY -RRB- , IVV , VOO , SSO , SH , SDS For More Info contact I came across this disaster of a story from the Associated Press yesterday : `` Apple May Surpass Exxon As Most Valuable Company . '' Interesting - Apple -LRB- AAPL -RRB- is a monster - but I did n't expect the AP -LRB- that 's Associated Press , not to be confused with AAPL -RRB- to attempt to mis-educate their vast audience with this blatantly false nonsense that shows a thorough lack of understanding of how the SPX works : While Apple CEO Steve Jobs will no doubt be happy about his new perch atop the business world , there 's more at stake here than mere bragging rights . As soon as the total value of the company 's shares edges above Exxon 's , Apple will take over the top spot in the Standard and Poor 's 500 , the market index used by most professional money managers . That means that billions of dollars invested in funds that track the index will have to shift their holdings to reflect Apple 's new weighting . Exxon , meanwhile , may see its share price fall from the same effect . That slide could be accelerated by hedge funds and technical traders who make bets based on the rebalancing of major indexes and would be primed to short the shares of Exxon . '' Reminder : The S&P 500 is a market cap weighted index . That means that larger companies have a higher weight in the index . An S&P 500 index fund will own a certain percentage of the outstanding shares of each company . It does n't take a market expert to understand that when Apple 's share price rises , and its market cap rises , its value in your S&P 500 portfolio also rises ! As an S&P indexer , you do n't have to do a thing . Changes in market cap based on share price movement are automatically self adjusting - after all , market cap = share price x shares outstanding . On a quarterly basis , the S&P 500 rebalances its index based on new share issuance and buybacks -LRB- in other words , changes in shares outstanding -RRB- . For example , when Exxon -LRB- XOM -RRB- buys back shares , S&P 500 indexers will need to sell shares of XOM . If XOM does a secondary offering , indexers will need to buy shares of XOM . So if you own one you need to relax it corrects automatic so you need not worry .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Medicare does not have a donut hole . Perhaps you are thinking of Medicare Part D , the private prescription drug plan . In 2013 the Part D donut hole is $ 2970 . Under Obamacare the donut hole will gradually close a little each year until 2020 when the hole will close completely . Of course there is a cost associated with transferring donut hole risk to the carrier . Medicare Part D premiums will rise , copay 's will rise and drug tiers will shift resulting in higher out of pocket costs for those who use a lot of medications , especially if those drugs are higher priced .
Insurance companies are a little more expensive because of the rising cost of materials as well . You dont want an insurance company that can not pay a claim . They fluctuate to compensate for the rising cost in materials and labor to fix your vehicle . As long as your rates dont go up too much , then it should be ok . It only goes up quite a bit when you have tickets or accidents .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
That is an excellent question ! With most whole life policies , the payments are generally set , and do not rise . When you are looking to purchase a policy , the cost will increase the older you get - so a policy purchased at the age of 15 will almost always be much less expensive than the same policy purchased at the age of 51 . Term policies will either increase as you enter new age bands -LRB- AARP , AAA , for example , that increase every 5 years -RRB- , or after the guaranteed rate period ends.It will rise once the policy ends , if you choose to renew it . Once you start the yearly renewal process , be aware that the price will get astronomically more expensive each time . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
How much is life insurance for someone 65 ? Any type of coverage will seem pricey to a younger person or a person expecting prices not to rise with age . Strangely many people do put off to 65 their purchase of a life policy . What they find is the cost is much higher than they thought . Most 65 year olds are no longer in tip top health so any underwriting discounts provided by good health will disappear , causing pricing to go upward .
Health insurance rates are rising and will be continuing to rise for several reasons ; 1 -RRB- Healthcare costs are rising -LRB- physician services , prescription drugs , inpatient services -RRB- 2 -RRB- An aging population - the Baby Boom generation , the largest demographic segment of our population , have now aged to the point where they are in the prime years of life -LRB- age 40 + -RRB- that health problems begin to become common . 3 -RRB- Increased consumption of health care services in general - across the board , the American population in general is consuming more and a broader array of health care services than past generations . 4 -RRB- New treatments - from expensive new prescription drugs to new forms of technology like robotic surgery we have a wide range of advances in medical science that allow for the treatment of conditions that in the past there were little or no options available . Few of these new advances are cheap . 5 -RRB- New Conditions - from Autisim , to Celiac Sprue Disease to a variety of other conditions , we can diagnose and treat a range of conditions that were n't even recognized as existing in previous decades . 6 -RRB- Cost Shifting to Cover the Cost of Treating the Uninsured - the cost of providing care for the uninsured who can not pay their own medical bills is shifted over to higher costs for people who are insured . 7 -RRB- Cost Shifting to Cover Government Underpayment for Medicaid and Medicare - since the inception of these government programs in the 1960 's they have never paid the market rate for health care services and in many situations they pay less than the cost of the services these populations consume . This cost difference has also been shifted over to the insured population . 8 -RRB- Government Intervention in the Health Insurance System - with the passage of the Affordable Care Act and the many changes it imposes on health insurance benefits and the financing of health insurance such as doing away with pre-existing condition limitations & exclusions , making policies guaranteed to be issued regardless of health condition , mandating a broad new range of services be covered by all health insurance policies -LRB- for example all policies must cover maternity and pediatric dental and vision services even if you are a 50 year old single male -RRB- , providing subsidies for the purchase of heath insurance up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level and expanding Medicaid eligibility in many states are all factors that will contribute to increased demand for a finite resource . Regardless of one 's political or philosophical views of these changes , basic economics teaches us that higher demand for something for which there is a limited supply leads to higher prices . There are more factors that contribute to the ever increasing cost of health insurance but these are among the main driving forces behind the steady increase in health insurance rates people have been experiencing .
Why does health insurance increase every year ? Actually there have been times where this does n't happen , but I would be harded pressed to remember . The thing that needs to be understood is health insurance premiums are a reflection of the cost of care rising . Most states office of the insurance commissioners have a ton of informtaion that can be accessed to review exactly how much an insurance company pays out . I often describe insurance premiums much like my own checkbook . Each month money comes in and each month money goes out . I only hope at the end of the month , there is some left over .
Long Term Care and the cost associated with it is rising in the US . According to page 63 in the 2015 Medicare and You Book `` At least 70 % of people over 65 will need long-term care services and support at some point '' . It 's always important to consider factoring in those cost in your retirement planning . Cost vary from state to state , you can find a great resource that outlines these costs at WEBSITELINK No matter how you look at it Long Term Care Insurance is expensive and there is a lot of underwriting that goes with it . A viable option for a lot of families is to consider short term care insurance . Premiums are much lower and the underwriting process is much easier . Many application are approved in under a week . Short Term Care plans can pay for nursing home facility , assisted living facility , home health care , adult day care and hospice care . Feel free to contact us for more information .
That is a good question ! Term life insurance policies are generally set for an exact number of years , ranging from 1 -LRB- your work policies -RRB- to 30 . The length of the term is clearly stated in the title of your policy . Your policy will show you many years after the stated term , and look carefully at the cost - see how it rises dramatically ? If you want to renew it after your term expires , that is what you will pay . Other term policies , like the ones advertised for Senior Citizens on TV , and the `` everyone 's guaranteed '' ones you get in the mail , do n't have a specific start age -LRB- the policy starts when you are approved and paid the first premium -RRB- but they have a definite end date - the day you turn 80 . These policies are legitimate life insurance policies , with good companies behind them , but I have repeatedly found that the seniors purchasing them do n't realize that they end , and leave them without any insurance that they can afford . These policies will also rise in price every few years also , another difference from a straight term policy . I hope that helps . Thanks for asking !
There 's a reason they call economics the `` dismal science '' , it often tells us things we would prefer to ignore . There has been concern about the financial viability of Medicare for decades and while there has been some tinkering around the edges , the politics associated with Medicare -LRB- senior citizens tend to vote -RRB- have so far prevented any far reaching overhaul . Our current concerns come from people living much longer now than when Medicare was created so some of the basic actuarial assumptions of the program are outmoded . Then you have the front end of theBaby Boom generation just entering into Medicare eligibility which will result in swelling enrollment in Medicare for decades to come . Finally , you have the number of actively employed persons paying Medicare taxes becoming a smaller and smaller ratio to the number of people claiming benefits . Oh , yes , and if you have n't noticed , the base cost of virtually all health care services continues to rise faster than the general inflation rate . So , you have more people enrolling and using the benefits for increasingly expensive care while at the same time you have a smaller pool of payers to financially support the current and upcoming enrollees . This is why many economists warn of the financial failure of Medicare if structural changes are not made to the program .
What type of life insurance you get depends on what you want the life insurance for and for how long you want / need the coverage . An independent life insurance broker who represents several companies can help you find the right policy at the right price . Here is overview to get you started : Term is insurance is initially the most inexpensive type of coverage . The premiums rise at the end of each term and the policy has an expiry date . Conversion to permanent insurance is usually permitted before a stated age -LRB- check contract for details -RRB- , Best for short term needs . Whole life is permanent coverage and usually has a guaranteed level premium . The policy 's death benefit could be designed to rise in value , In addition there could be a significant build up of cash value . This type of policy has long term applications in financial , retirement and estate planning . Since the premium is level , it is initially higher than term coverage for the same amount . If cost is a concern a combination of whole life and term can often be an alternative . Universal life can provide permanent insurance coverage . I say can be because it is essentially a whole life policy `` unbundled '' where you control the amount of premium and the investment options . This flexibility is a double edge sword . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Annuity Rates are directly tied to the Fed Funds Rate & to 10 Year Treasury Rates . Both of these are at historical lows at the moment . Most financial experts claim that interest rates should rise over the next 5 years . If this happens , Annuity Rates will rise as along with them .
Which life insurance is best for young people ? It 's going to depend on needs and budget for most young people . This is also an excellent time to look at whole life insurance as the cost is very low for young people and the cost NEVER rises . That becomes very important over time as the cost of insurance rises considerably as a person ages . Locking in your costs , taking control of your policy is pretty special .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Happens When My Life Insurance Policy Matures ?
If by matures you mean the end of the policy period , like the end of 20 year term life insurance policy , without converting it to a permanent policy coverage is terminated . If by matures you mean a permanent policy that endows at age 100 or age 121 , then there are a couple of scenarios . Unless otherwise stated in the policy , coverage ends on the maturity date . All policy loans of cash value , whether internal and/or borrowed out are recharterized as phantom income and the gain is taxed as ordinary at the effective tax bracket rate of the policy owner .
A life insurance policy matures when it pays out a death benefit on policies that have no stated maturity date . Otherwise , the policy will indicate a maturity date which , on many whole life policies , may be age 95 , 98 , 100 , 120 , etc. . The issue with a policy that matures while the insured is still alive is that the maturity benefit will be taxable as the cash is constructively received at that point . Many policies in recent years have maturity extension riders or policy provisions which can extend maturity to prevent such an unwelcome situation so check your policy . Death benefits are normally received income tax-free but a living maturity is income taxable to the extent of gain in the contract to the policy-owner . If maturity is approaching and such riders are not present , insurers have been known to agree , upon request , to continue the policy extra-contractually . Contact an experienced life insurance professional for assistance .
It depends on how the policy was designed . A whole life insurance policy matures when it pays out a death benefit on policies that have no stated maturity date . Otherwise , the policy will indicate a maturity date which , on many whole life policies , may be age 95 , 98 , 100 , 120 , etc. . The issue with a policy that matures while the insured is still alive is that the maturity benefit will be taxable as the cash is constructively received at that point . Many policies in recent years have maturity extension riders or policy provisions which can extend maturity to prevent such an unwelcome situation so check your policy . Death benefits are normally received income tax-free but a living maturity is income taxable to the extent of gain in the contract to the policy-owner . If maturity is approaching and such riders are not present , insurers have been known to agree , upon request , to continue the policy extra-contractually . Contact an experienced life insurance professional for assistance .
Life Insurance matures when the guaranteed cash value of the policy equals the face amount of the policy . This can not happen in Term life because there is no cash value in Term insurance . Whole Life and some Universal Life policies will mature if the proceeds are not paid out as a death benefit prior to the policy maturing .
Life insurance maturity occurs when the policy 's reserve equals its death benefit and the reserve -LRB- also called cash value -RRB- is paid to the policy owner . Level premium life insurance policies have a charge that accounts for an investment portion of the policy to build a reserve that covers a portion of the policy 's death benefit . The purpose is for the cash value to eventually replace all of the death benefit , and this is the point at which the policy matures . When a policy matures the cash value -LRB- which is another and more common term used for the reserve -RRB- equals the death benefit , and the cash value is paid to the policy owner there are taxable consequences to the extent that cash received exceeds the total of premiums paid . Due to this taxable consequence , some more recently designed policies have an indefinite maturity date so as to avoid maturity prior to the insured 's death .
The age that Life Insurance ends is dependent on the age that the person was when they took it out , and the type of policy they took out . For Term Life Insurance , the policy ends -LRB- or goes up in price to what is usually an unaffordable cost -RRB- at the end of the term . Therefore , someone who is 55 years old and takes out a 10 year Term policy will have to find a new policy at age 65 . For Whole Life Insurance , the policy ends when death occurs or when the policy matures -LRB- typically at age 100 -RRB- . At either time , the full amount of the death benefit is paid -LRB- when the policy matures , you are actually receiving the cash value , which becomes equal to the death benefit , called `` endowment '' -RRB- . If you quit paying premiums on the policy , or borrow without paying it back , the policy could end sooner without any benefit being paid . This is true for any type of Life Insurance policy . Some Whole Life policies are paid for with a single premium ; as long as you do n't borrow from them , those will be in effect upon death or maturity without paying any more premiums , as will any policy that is `` paid up '' at a certain point . Universal Life operates much like Whole Life , except you can pick an age at which your guaranteed coverage will end .
The phrase , maturity date , is used in different ways . Some life insurance companies call the end of the term the maturity date . So in that sense , term life insurance does have a maturity date . More commonly , maturity date refers to a date that has been set at the time you purchased the policy , when the cash value equals the death benefit . If you have not died before that time , you can then take out the cash value/death benefit on the maturity date . Term life insurance does not have cash value , so it would not pay out anything on the maturity date .
Does Term life insurance `` mature '' ? Typically the term ` mature ' as used in connection with life insurance policies refers to policy reaching the point at which the cash value has attained the `` face '' value of the policy . At that point the face value of the policy will be awarded to the owner and the policy terminated . In the case of Term insurance there is NO cash value ever , so in the typical sense as used in life insurance parlance term insurance does not mature . However one could say that a term insurance policy `` matures '' at the point at which it terminates . That is it has reached the full term and then expires .
If by mature you mean endows or the policy period ends , there are a few things that may happen.If the policy is whole life and has a maturity date , then the cash values exceeding basis will be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . If you have received policy loans and did not pay the loan interest , but used policy cash values to pay the charges , you will have a phantom income ordinary tax event on loans you have received and cash values remaining in the policy . In some polices coverage simply ceases . Highly unlikely , but all this could happen .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
A permanent life insurance policy will mature in most cases at age 100 . Some plans will endow -LRB- another word for mature -RRB- at age 95 while some at ages above 100 . When your policy matures the face amount is paid to you less any policy indebtedness . A mature policy will almost always trigger a taxable event .
The insurance company sells an annuity as a long term cash accumulation instrument with the ultimate intention being to produce a lifetime income to the annuitant . Each annuity is structured so that the assets of the company can meet the promises that have been made in the contract . To do that they invest in things that have varying maturity dates . That plan of investment is reflected in the surrender fee . To take a bond for example that will mature in five years and cash it in early the company will realize a loss of earnings . The same thing happens when you buy a Certificate of Deposit .
Life insurance maturity generally refers to the contract ending point where coverage ends and any cash values are distributed . In our modern application of life insurance maturity dates extend to age 121 , with some life insurance companies using language and not age as their maturity date , i.e. the life of the insured . Any cash values that exceed basis in a policy maturity event are subject to ordinary income tax .
What happens when you Life Insurance policy expires depends on the type of policy and the event . If the policy expires because it is reached the end of contract and there is no option for renewal , the policy end . For example term policies usually expire at a specified age . You usually have an option to convert to a permanent policy sometime before the expiry date . If you mean by expiring going out of force because of non-payment you , if you are healthy you can often reinstate the policy by payment of back premiums . Some policies have a cash value that is paid when the policy expires or matures . The policy wording would specify . If you have any questions , or feel that I could be of asssitance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Life insurance really does not mature . Permanent life insurance or cash value life insurance does not mature but they endow . These are the whole life and universal life policies that endow when the cash value equals the face amount . Term life insurance has no cash value and can not endow . Term life insurance either expires when the term is met or has a steep rate increase when the term is met .
Can I borrow against my retirement plan ? With some plans , yes you can . But with this option the question becomes `` should you '' ? Loan provisions would be most common with a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- plan . While usually hardship related , the reasons have been reduced from hardship only status for some time . Trucks , cars , vacations were the norm for a while with retirement plans loans . The problem with pension loans is they take funds out of the investment pool . Sure you 're paying yourslef back , but at 5 % . What happens when those funds , left alone would have made 10 % ? Also if you leave employment for any reason , the loan balance is due immediately or it becomes a pre-mature distribution . So taxable income and a 10 % penalty . Borrowing from your pension is a last resort only choice . Never a first choice .
Life insurance maturity is the date at which the face amount of a permanent life insurance policy is paid to the beneficiary stated in the policy -LRB- in case of death -RRB- or to the policy holder -LRB- if the insured is still alive when the maturity date is reached -RRB- . In Whole Life , the maturity date coincides with endowment , or the accumulation of cash value to equal the face amount .
Yes , Whole Life Insurance matures , usually at age 100 . The maturity date is when the cash value equals the face amount of the policy . This is also called endowment . If you pay a higher premium in the earlier years of a Whole Life insurance policy , the policy can mature at an earlier age than 100 .
Assuming that the question is referring to when a permanent life insurance policy matures , it depends on the type of life insurance and the policy owner activity that preceded the maturity date . But in general terms , at maturity , all policy gains are characterized as ordinary income and taxed accordingly . Any outstanding policy loans received by the policy owner are characterized as ordinary income and taxed accordingly . Any internal loans cause by the cannibalization of cash values to pay annual policy loan interest are also characterized as ordinary income and taxed accordingly .
Before defining Variable Annuities , it is important to have an understanding about annuities in general . Immediate guaranteed annuity - in exchange for a lump sum the insurance company will pay a guaranteed amount for the rest of your life , -LRB- with or without a minimum payout guaranteed -RRB- or for a specified term or duration . Easy way to understand it is like a mortgage in reverse - you give lump sum and get income in return . Immediate variable annuity - in exchange for a lump sum you receive an income as above , all or part of the income amount depends on the performance of a pool of funds or an index chosen by you . Deferred annuity - you deposit fund with an insurance company and the funds are invested and you have guaranteed annuity amount or an option to receive at maturity -LRB- depending on what you had chosen -RRB- . Variable deferred annuity - In Canada , these are typically called segregated funds and are similar to mutual funds , but since they are issued by insurance companies , they have guarantees at maturity and death.The amount of the investment will vary depending on the performance of the funds chosen and can be converted into a immediate annuity at maturity . This is a very simple overview of a potentially complex subject and you should not take any action before discussing with a licensed professional . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Will A DUI Affect My Car Insurance ?
Great question ! I hope sincerely that you never have to find out . The answer in almost every case is yes . Driving under the influence increases your risk for an accident exponentially and you know that as your risk increases , so does your premium . Some companies will cancel your policy , and getting another policy will be difficult . Thanks for asking !
A DUI will impact your car insurance rates , although the increase in premium will depend on several factors , including the company you are insured with , your driving record -LRB- other than the DUI -RRB- , number of vehicles insured and liability limits that you carry . As an experienced car insurance broker -LRB- for 33 years ! -RRB- , we work closely with any customer who is convicted of a DUI . It 's important to maintain quality coverage , but , of course , it 's also important to ensure all discounts are being applied , and all options are reviewed so you pay the lowest available rate .
When you are convicted of a DUI you will be required to notify the DMV of your financial responsibility . That will trigger a reaction by your insurer . They will know immediately that you have been convicted of DUI . What they do at that point will vary . At renewal you will find that you have been assessed points for the DUI and those points will trail you for 10 years in California . In California you will also lose your good drivers discount . Sometimes clients think that this is the time to shop for auto insurance . Unless you simply can not pay the premium , dropping coverage at this stage is not in your best interests . Your existing insurance company is likely to treat you with more consideration than any subsequent insurance company . By the time you pay the fine , pay for the drivers education course and face the doubling of your auto premiums you will determine that drinking and driving does not pay in California .
A DUI can affect life insurance rates , or even cause a decline . But if the DUI happened years ago , it may not affect your rate at all . The key factor with a DUI is how long ago it occurred ; whether there was more than one DUI ; and , if alcohol treatment was ordered , whether you continue to drink alcohol . One DUI over 5 years ago will affect rates far less than repeat DUI 's within a few years , especially if alcohol abuse/addiction is present .
A DUI will not directly affect the rate on your homeowners insurance . It can affect your rate by proxy though . DUI are typically very costly . If your credit score should take a big hit due to the financial consequences of the DUI your rate could conceivably change . To say that your homeowners rate absolutely would not be affected by the consequences of a DUI would possibly not be true .
A DUI will affect life insurance if within a certain number of years of applying for the policy . With simplified issue plans -LRB- those that do not require an exam , and usually do not require medical records -RRB- , you may be approved as quickly as two years after the DUI , although some carriers will make you wait 10 years after the DUI to get that type of coverage . If applying for a medically underwritten policy , the rate will vary depending on how many years from the DUI it has been . Underwriters also consider whether you had treatment for alcohol abuse in conjunction with the DUI , whether there were repeat offenses , if you still drink alcohol , etc. . In the worst case scenario of recent DUI , repeat DUI 's , repeat treatments , still drinking , there is guaranteed issue life insurance for those who fit the age guidelines . To get your best price for life insurance after a DUI , it is a good idea to use a broker who can shop the many policies out there and find you the best price .
A DUI will affect life insurance rates , or the ability to get some life insurance policies , for some time . The amount of time depends on the policy . Some No Exam policies will delay until two years after the DUI . Others will not count the DUI unless drug or alcohol treatment was needed . And others will not look at DUI 's at all . When applying for a medically underwritten policy , a DUI can keep a person from the best rates for as long as 10 years with some companies . But if it was an isolated incident and the applicant now drinks lightly or not at all , the impact is less than if substance abuse treatment was ordered and the applicant has gone back to drinking heavily . The life insurance company will also look at other traffic violations , if there a multiple offenses , and other factors . To find your best rate after a DUI , contact an agency that sells policies from many companies so they can sift through them for you and find you the one that will give you the best rates .
It depends ! Like most everything in the world of life insurance , rates and qualifications for different life insurance policies vary widely from company to company . Typically , though , if your DUI was more than 5 years ago it wo n't affect your ability to get a policy . Inside of 5 years , it will , and it will also affect your rates , as most insurance companies wo n't give you their best rates if you have a DUI . This means that your DUI will cost you some extra dollars when it comes time to pay your premiums .
Yes . DUIs can greatly affect your the risk class you can qualify for in life inurance . A history of being charged with driving under the influence -LRB- DUI -RRB- or driving while intoxicated -LRB- DWI -RRB- one or more times can make it difficult to obtain the life insurance coverage you need at an affordable rate . The ratings that life insurance companies will assign for people with history of DUI vary substantially between companies and the difference could cost you thousands of dollars . Whether applying for a fully underwritten or non-medical life insurance policy , the carriers will want to know the input regarding a number of questions -LRB- typically you would fill out a DUI questionnaire form with the application -RRB- to make an accurate risk assessment : 1 -RRB- How many times have you been charged with DUI/DWI ? 2 -RRB- When was the most recent charge ? 3 -RRB- Are you currently on probation ? 4 -RRB- Has your license been revoked or suspended one or more times ? 5 -RRB- Have you been cited for any other traffic offenses ? 6 -RRB- Have you sought treatment for alcohol abuse at a rehab facility or attended meetings with support groups like Alcoholics Anonymous ? 7 -RRB- Are you still drinking , or have you quit completely ? The most likely offer you receive , depending on how long it 's been since the DUI , will either require a table rating and/or a flat extra rating . A table rating is an additional percentage charged on top of the standard premium . As an example , a Table D/Table 4 is generally about two times the standard premium . A flat extra rating is an additional cost per thousand dollars of coverage , such as $ 2.50 per thousand . Another example would be a $ 1,000,000 policy with a flat extra of $ 2.50 per thousand would require additional premium of $ 2,500 in addition of the standard rate , regardless of how many years the policy is guaranteed . If you have a history of DUI or DWI in your records , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time . The more companies that give you a table rating , flat extra rating , or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer . Your best option is to consult with an experienced life insurance broker before applying for any coverage . We can shop the case for you among multiple carriers to get an understanding of the risk class carriers will likely assign for your coverage - this will point you in the direction of who is the most appropriate carrier to apply for coverage with . The risk class is the most critical item for coverage because it determines the premiums . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A DUI is certainly a major infraction that will affect both pricing and availablilty of car insurance . In some states , a DUI charge will result in at least a temporary suspention of your driver 's license . It wou dbe very difficult to shop for and obtain car insurance with a suspended license , if not impossible . In a situation like that , if it is a first such offense , usually the state will offer a course that , once completed , will clear your record and reinstate your license . Shoping at that time would be much easier and more successful .
Does a DUI affect life insurance ? The short answer is yes . Many companies ask about and consider driving records when underwriting a new life insurance policy . Depending on your driving record a company may rate your premiums or perhaps decline . A DUI is criminal offence and it is taken quite seriously . An experienced insurance broker , who can access several companies , should be able to help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
If you are applying for a life insurance policy yes a DUI may affect your eligability for coverage or your rates for the policy . If you have alife insurance policy that is active when you received the DUI then your premium and coverage should remain intact.Please read your policy completely to know what coverage is provided and any exclusions that there may be .
A DUI will affect life insurance rates , depending on when it occurred , whether it was a repeat DUI , if there was alcohol treatment but the person kept on drinking , etc. . The worst scenario is having to take guaranteed issue or simplified issue life insurance , but after a couple years a medically underwritten policy is usually available .
If the DUI is many years ago and you have not had any repeat offenses , you can get Life Insurance at a similar rate than if you never had a DUI at all . If the DUI was very recent , and especially if your license is suspended because of the DUI , you may need to purchase a guaranteed issue policy until some time has passed . Once you get a year or two out from the DUI you will be able to buy at least simplified issue life insurance , and again , when more years have passed , the effect of the DUI on your rates will lessen until it has little to no effect at all . Repeat DUI 's , being ordered to attend treatment multiple times , or multiple types of driving offenses can complicate things . Contact a good impaired risk life insurance agent to sort through many companies for you so you can get the lowest possible rate that you qualify for at this time , and keep in mind that you may be able to get a better price in the future .
A DUI will impact your car insurance rates , although the increase in premium will depend on several factors , including the company you are insured with , your driving record -LRB- other than the DUI -RRB- , number of vehicles insured and liability limits that you carry . As an experienced car insurance broker -LRB- for 33 years ! -RRB- , we work closely with any customer who is convicted of a DUI . It 's important to maintain quality coverage , but , of course , it 's also important to ensure all discounts are being applied , and all options are reviewed so you pay the lowest available rate .
The domestic riding of a motor cycle in itself should not affect your ability to secure life insurance coverage as any other potential insured . However , motor cycle racing is a hazardous recreation and vocation subject underwriting flat extras . Also multiple motor cycle moving violations or DUIs , a subject rarely addressed in questions life this , could actually cost the potential insured more money than a convention car owner with the same motor vehicle report .
Getting life insurance with a DUI is possible . The price you pay will largely depend on how long ago the DUI occurred . If there was alcohol treatment involved , and a second DUI occurred after that , you may not be able to get a medically underwritten policy , but will be able to get a simplified issued policy a year or two after the last DUI .
You absolutely can get life insurance with a DUI on your record , though there may be limits on the amount of the face value . In today 's environment of guaranteed issue , there are not many entities that are prohibited from coverage . With adverse situations such as a DUI , any policy that is not guaranteed issue will most likely be rated ; more than one DUI will be looked upon in an unfavorable light by most underwriters , and will definitely be rated . This not only will result in higher rates , but may also result in limits on the amount of coverage provided . Short answer - yes you can get coverage with a DUI on your record .
Great Question . Car insurance will go up after a DUI it might be up to % 100 increase in insurance pemium . Some companies will also drop your insurance if you get a DUI or DWI it all depends on your insurance company . Good luck and stay safe while driving your car .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Why Should Landlords Require Renters Insurance ?
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Always . And the landlord should request evidence of the existence of the renters insurance . Reason number one : Under the personal liability coverage of a renters policy the carrier agrees to pay the sums the insured is legally liable for as a result of bodily injury or property damage . What type of occurrencescould be involved ? A guest in the renter 's apartment slips on a wet bathroom floor , falls , and is injured . This is bodily injury . The tenant leaves a pan of oil on the stove unattended and a fire results damaging the building . This is property damage . Reason number two : Unless legally liable , the landlord is not responsible for the tenant 's business or personal property -LRB- for things like fire , theft , mysterious disappearance , etc -RRB- The tenant should cover their own property with insurance like a renters policy .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
There are two reasons why you might be required to have a renters policy . Your landlord is not responsible for your personal property in the rental unit . If the unit was to burn and your property is destroyed you dont have a claim against the landlord . If someone is injured in your unit and sues you , it isnt your landlord that is responsible , it is you . To make sure that the landlord and you dont have misunderstandings and that the expense for the lawsuit is handled properly , the landlord is making it a requirement of your tenancy to maintain a renters policy and probably is requiring that he be named as an additional insured .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
That is a great question ! You can not be forced to get renters insurance , but the landlord can make it a requirement for you to be able to rent from them . You can always choose to rent somewhere else . But I 'd want you to think about it for a second . Why should you have it ? The landlord has insurance , but it does n't cover any of your belongings . If your apartment caught on fire , His insurance would cover the building repairs , but you and your neighbors ' belongings are another story . And the liability for the fire may leave you open to a lawsuit for the repair bill . Renters insurance is relatively cheap , and can save both you , and your landlord , a ton of grief . That 's why they want you to have it . If you would like some tips on what to look for , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
In some States , the Law requires for all Tenant Lease Contracts to include a clause requiring tenants to purchase and provide proof of Renters Insurance to the Landlord . In most States , this is not the case . However , a Landlord has the right to require a tenant to responsibly be insured as part of the agreement ; as long as both the Landlord and Tenant sign the Lease , it is a legal agreement . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and provides a huge protection to both the Landlord and the Tenant in the event of a claim . The minimum amount of Personal Liability is $ 100,000 on most contracts and has no associated deductible ; the minimum amount of Personal Property coverage could be as low as $ 20,000 to which the policy deductible will apply . In order to generate the lowest premium for those uninterested in coverage but required to purchase coverage , one should obtain a quote for the minimum liability limit , the minimum personal property coverage and the maximum deductible . Providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
If it is included in your renters contract , renters insurance can be required . This is actually a very smart thing , both for the renter and for the landlord . The renters insurance will protect your property in case of fire or theft , and it helps protect the landlord in case of a liability claim . Also , landlord insurance is generally cheaper if renters insurance is required .
Landlords are concerned about liability arising from your possession of their property . If a guest of yours slips inside the unit and is injured they will certainly sue you but may also sue the landlord . This is why the landlord often requires that you maintain a renters policy that will address suits arising from personal injury and physical damage . By having you secure a policy and name them as additional insured they are less vulnerable to lawsuit . Additionally , tenants rarely fully appreciate that if something happens to the unit and your personal property is damaged or destroyed , the landlord doesnt have any liability . If you have a renters policy there is some money available to restore what you have lost .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A landlord at their discretion can require renters insurance as part of the rental agreement . If you do not wish to purchase renters insurance you have the right to look for housing from a landlord who does not have this requirement . The landlord is not breaking any laws by making renters insurance a requirement of the rental agreement .
end question
start question
annuities
Who Has The Highest Fixed Annuity Rate ?
There are a number of questions that need to be answered before you can develop a short list of annuities offering the highest rates . Here are a few questions : Is the annuity for growth or deferred income ? What length of time are you willing to leave your money in the annuity for growth or before you trigger income from the annuity ? How much does insurance company rating concern you ? There are new annuity products coming on the market each week , so the answer could change . There are other questions to consider as well and it is best to discuss your specific needs with an independent agent who can help come up with your `` short list '' of annuities and companies to consider .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
The highest paying annuities should be assessed by category : guaranteed fixed rate , indexed crediting rate , etc. . Annuity interest rates can change so always check your annuity brokerage company for the latest crediting , but as of mid-May 2013 , the fixed rate for 5 years was just around 3 % and indexed caps around 5 % . The low interest rate environment is creating innovation with income riders that can pay on distribution up to 7 % . Remember all these rates can change .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
Every rating agency has their own ratings . With AM Best , A + + is their best rating . With Fitch , their highest rating is AAA . Moody 's highest rating is Aaa . S&P 's best life insurance company rating is AAA . Weiss 's highest rating is A + . The companies with the best ratings will have high ratings from all these agencies .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
An annuity is the only financial instrument that will pay a guaranteed income for the rest of your life . A fixed annuity has an established guaranteed rate of interest . There isnt any risk of losing money in a fixed annuity . Fixed annuities actually pay a current rate of interest which is normally higher than the guaranteed rate . There is a tendency for that rate to mirror market conditions and remain competitive . There are many annuities that have been written where the guaranteed rate exceeds the current rate making them exceptionally good investments .
USAA is rated A + + by AM Best -LRB- highest of 16 possible ratings -RRB- , Aaa by Moody 's -LRB- highest of 21 possible ratings -RRB- and AA + by Standard & Poor 's -LRB- second highest of 21 possible ratings -RRB- . In regard to life insurance products , they carry several types of products . Between their strong financial strength and variety in products , it could well be said that USAA has good life insurance .
The rate of return of annuities really depends on what type of annuity you are talking about . Fixed Annuities have a set base rate similar to a CD , they pay a guaranteed rates of interest . If you are looking for a fixed annuity make sure you shop around some companies like Fidelity & Guaranty Life and Guaranty Income Life are raising their base rates . When you are looking at Index Annuities the insurance company gives you a guaranteed minimum interest rate and also a crediting strategy like the S&P 500 or something like that . Think of it this way there are two buckets of money , the first has your money with the guaranteed interest rate , the second has your money linked to the crediting strategy of the market . If the market goes up they will credit that bucket with interest -LRB- every company has different participation rates and caps -RRB- . If the market is down then that bucket will earn no interest . When ever you want to start drawing an income , the insurance company will see which bucket has the most money and that bucket will be used for income . If you work with a good broker , they have software that will show you what your investment will look like with all of the companies . Please let me know if I can help in any way .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Covered With Disability Insurance ?
What is covered with Disability Insurance ? Your income . Disability insurance is paycheck insurance driven by a simple definition `` the ability to work at your own occupation . '' Does n't matter if you get sick or hurt while covered . The other aspect of good disabilty insurance is you 're still covered even if you can only work half time or in a limited way that reduces your income .
Full coverage disability covers accidents on and off the worksite . It also covers periods of sickness . It can also cover specific vocational skill sets like a medical doctor who also is a plastic surgeon under owner occupation terms of the disability policy . Some disability policies have certain nuances in their policy definitions that could be unique to your situation .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
What to look for in Disability Insurance ? While there are many options to consider with disability insurance , a `` good '' disability policy comes down to one defining sentence . The most important thing is `` the definition of what disability IS . '' You see payment from a disability plan all comes down to what qualifies as a disability based on the definition of disability in the contract -LRB- policy -RRB- . If it is not simple and straight forward in this definition , you might want to look elsewhere . Pretty much beyond the first couple sentences about the definition of disability in a DI policy are terms where they take away from the definition , they exclude and make exceptions . The best policies are straight forward without a lot of fluff when it comes to that definition . And with a disability policy , words are everything .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Some things to consider when buying disability insurance are : 1 -RRB- Do you want short term disability insurance , or long term disability insurance , or both ? Long term disability is recommended if you can not afford both , as the effects of being unable to work for many months or years is the most devastating . 2 -RRB- How much -LRB- what % -RRB- of your income do you wish to replace ? It usually makes sense to get as much as you can . 3 -RRB- Do you want to spend more to have Own Occupation feature ? If not , you will need to go back to work when you can do any job . With `` own occ '' you will be paid until you can go back to your own occupation . 4 -RRB- What about Residual Disability ? Getting a policy that offers Residual Disability enables you to receive a partial benefit based proportionate to the amount of income lost when able to resume working part time -LRB- unlike Partial Disability , which just pays a set % -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What does your policy cover ? Make sure it covers illness and injury , and review the conditions covered .
What type of disability insurance should I get ? The one that provides you the best definiton of disability that you can afford . Disability insurance is all about the definition of what is a `` disability '' . What you 'll find is the best disability plans have the fewest words in describing what disability is . Without a solid definition , you have a policy you pay for , that does n't pay you back when you have a claim .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
When reviewing your disability insurance options , you should be sure to understand the differences between company contracts . With disability insurance , the key to the contract is the definition of disability and definition and requirements of the policy benefits . All disability contracts are NOT created equal . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . Guardian offers this definition and is our group 's top disability company to write business with . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Disability insurance and the Family Medical Leave Act -LRB- FMLA -RRB- are two different animals . Disability insurance replaces a portion of income during the time the insured is unable to work due to a covered medical condition . FMLA is a federal law which provides unpaid job protected leave when an employee has to stop working due to his or her own disability , or to care for a sick family member . Disability insurance will not cover an FMLA leave when the employee is caring for a sick family member . It may cover the FMLA leave for an employee 's own disability . However the length of leave under FMLA -LRB- 12 weeks maximum -RRB- is different than the disability leave -LRB- while disabled up to the policy 's maximum benefit period -RRB- .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
Disability insurance protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Term Life Insurance Premiums Increase ?
If you have a Term Life Insurance policy where the premiums are not guaranteed , they could possibly increase . Sometimes level term is called that due to the level face amount , with the possibility that premiums could increase after x number of years . Some term policies are called guaranteed , but the company just means that the premium wo n't go up unless it goes up for the whole group -LRB- which can be several times per year -RRB- . And all term policies have a big jump in premiums after the guaranteed period ends .
There are different types of term life insurance . Annual renewable term is a step up or increasing premium . Guaranteed level term life insurance offers a stable premium throughout the guaranteed period : 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . After the guaranteed period , the premiums increase . If you convert your term life insurance to permanent life insurance the premiums will also increase .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It generally does not expire at an exact age and most people wont keep a term policy past the term premium guarantee period . The premium guarantee period on a traditional term life insurance policy will last until your term period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 30 year term policy , the premium will remain fixed and guaranteed for 30 years -RRB- . When the term period expires , the policy changes to annual renewable term insurance and the premium will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- - this can generally be continued up to age 95 on most policies . However , the premiums that would be needed to continue the coverage will be SUBSTANTIALLY higher than what you were paying before and will only go up and up . Term policies on a UL chassis may keep the premiums the same past the term guarantee period , but rather than the premium increasing , the death benefit will decrease each year - can vary by company . Another type of term insurance is banded coverage - meaning premiums will increase every 5 years as you hit the next age bracket . These are generally term insurance to a specific age - generally up to either 80 or 90 . If you live past the designated max age , the coverage will cease immediately -LRB- if kept that long -RRB- - supplementing your term coverage with permanent coverage can be of great value .
-- > Normal 0 Whether anyone wants to admit it or not , insurance consumers tend to seek ways to reduce their insurance expenses while insurance providers are always looking for ways to increase their revenue . A rate increase is one alternative insurers might use to increase your premium but more often than not your premium frequently increases for other reasons . An insurer 's base rates are only one factor that goes into the calculation of your actual insurance premium . You should know what those factors are . The most common factor may be an increase in your amount of insurance . Your insurance company may claim construction costs in your area have increased and your amounts of insurance have been increased accordingly . That may be true but higher limits do n't always mean higher premiums . Discounts they may have applied in prior years may have changed or been discontinued . Penalties may have been applied if you had a claim or your credit score has changed . Rate categories may change as your home gets older . The reasons can be endless . But that doesnt mean you have to simply accept the increase . Question the reason for any increase . Determine if you are eligible for other discounts or credits . Consider other insurers who might offer you more favorable premium treatment . In my experience , insurers rates dont change all that often , and they can go up or down . Other factors used to calculate your final premium are usually the reason you see your premiums go up so often . Be proactive , a little effort and a few questions could save you a lot of money .
The percentage of the population that will die at a given age increases with age . That is , there will be a higher percentage of 50 years die in a given year than 20 year olds . That is why term life insurance is more expensive for a 50 year old than it is for a 20 year old . Imagine what the cost would be fore term life insurance for a 90 year old . The choice then , is to purchase a policy that will pay a death benefit should you die in the next term -LRB- 10 20 years for example . -RRB- The problem is that you are likely , very likely to live longer than the term . If you still want the death benefit paid to those you love , you must take steps to get a longer term policy , in which case you will probably still outlive the policy term , or buy a whole life policy . The whole life policy will have an initial premium that is greater than the term insurance premium , because it is going to pay the death benefit sometime and it guarantees not to increase the premium , ever . The whole life policy can do this because it accumulates reserves in anticipation of the increasing frequency of death claims as you age . These accumulated reserves become the cash value of the policy . Because the premium for term insurance increases as you become older there will be as point at which the whole life insurance purchased at an earlier age will be cheaper than the term policy purchased at an increased age . The cash value gives the policyholder the flexibility to make adjustments over time . It provides a cash reserve or emergency fund and a loan can be taken against the policy . If the coverage is no longer necessary it can be surrendered and the cash value will be given to the owner of the policy .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
Homeowners Insurance is a contract whereby a homeowner transfers his/her risk to an insurance carrier in return for a contract and a small premium . Homeowners Insurance Premium will usually increase from year to year ; however , by chance a decrease may be seen once in a while . Insurance companies increase the Dwelling Coverage each year to keep up with the increasing cost of reconstruction ; after all , homeowners insurance 's primary purpose is to rebuild a home in the unfortunate event of a total loss . The small increase of dwelling coverage each year is usually the purpose that draws attention when the premium rises ; however , this is very insignificant . Insurance companies are audited each year and are obligated to comply with State Department of Insurance regulations in each and every State where they underwrite risk . Each year , insurance carriers calculate the necessary premium to maintain a safe financial condition and offer security to all homes insured ; the largest reason for premium increase would be ` loss experience ' during the prior year , another reason may be due to increased operational cost including but definitely not limited to reinsurance premium paid . Insurance Companies either have an internal actuarial department or hire an independent actuarial firm who are charged with the responsibility of calculating premium based on underwriting factors and prior loss data . For this reason , carriers only offer annual policies and are unable to predict risk on a longer term basis . Since carriers experience different loss results each and every year , insurance rates and increase percentages are never the same from one year to the next . Since paid losses continue to grow , claim frequency is showing growth and litigation is becoming more commonplace , insurance companies raise premium to keep up with the outflow of payments . It is important to recognize that claims and operational expenses are paid from the pool of collected policy premium . For a more detailed explanation or financial report from your current carrier , contact your carrier representative to receive a report . Also , data is available as published by the Department of Insurance in most States .
The age at which life insurance premiums increase , IF they increase , depends on the policy you have . If you have term life insurance , premiums will go up when the guaranteed period ends . That is usually when the number of years in the term is up -LRB- e.g. if you have 10 year term , premiums go up 10 years from the time you purchased the policy -RRB- . However , some premiums are not guaranteed to stay the same for the full term period . So be sure to ask what the `` guaranteed level '' period is when you buy your term life insurance policy . With Whole Life or Universal Life , you might never have a price increase . Again , it depends on the policy . Some organizations offer policies that can raise rates at any time , as long as you are not singled out for the price increase . Others will raise rates every 5 years , or at certain ages . If you buy a Whole Life or `` no-lapse '' Universal Life policy from an agent , your premium will usually be locked in for your lifetime .
This can actually be a bit of a loaded question because the type of coverage you 're looking for , your need , your risk class , premium tolerance , and a number of other factors will really direct where you should go to buy your insurance . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage -LRB- a combination of benefits -RRB- - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . You can also create a combination of benefits by having some a larger sum total of term insurance for the first part and have it drop to a lower amount for the back end of a given length of time -LRB- e.g. you have $ 1,000,000 for the first 20 years and then have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 -RRB- . A brief description of the two types of coverage are as follows : Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . It 's always advisable to consult with an experienced life insurance broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . You can send me a private message if you need assistance with your program .
Yes , unless they are guaranteed to stay `` level '' , life insurance premiums can increase . One of the biggest factors on how much life insurance costs , is the length of time for which you lock in your premiums . E.g. . If you buy a 10 year level term policy , the premium will be relatively low , but will only stay the same for 10 years . After that , the premium will increase drastically . However , if you buy a permanent policy with guaranteed level premiums , the initial premium will be higher , but you will never experience a rate increase . When you are approved for a life insurance policy , you will see right at the front of the printed policy how long your premium is guaranteed to stay level , and at what point the premiums could/will increase . If you are nearing a point in your policy where your premiums will go up , you might want to take care of that now , as you may have options now that will not be available after the premium increase takes effect .
Thirty Year Term means that the policy will be in force for 30 years , at which time the policy may be renewed if that option is available or unless it converted to a permanent policy -LRB- again if that option is available -RRB- , it will terminate . There are a couple different types of term policies . Level Term means the face amount will stay level for the term of the policy . This is most common . There is also decreasing term , meaning the face amount decreases over the term of the policy . This is usually used to cover a mortgage for example . There is also increasing term where the death benefit increases over the term of the policy . This is far less common . There are some term policies that allow for premium increases during the term of the policy so be careful and do n't just assume the premium will stay level . I have seen some contracts that allow companies to increase premiums based on there mortality experience .
There are different types of term life insurance . Annual renewable term is a step up or increasing premium . Guaranteed level term life insurance offers a stable premium throughout the guaranteed period : 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . After the guaranteed period , the premiums increase . If you convert your term life insurance to permanent life insurance the premiums will also increase .
If the cost of auto repairs hasnt increased and damages awarded in lawsuits hasnt increased , auto insurance probably shouldnt increase . Your state insurance commissioner keeps a close eye on insurance cost in your states . He does this for two reasons . The first is to make sure that the public isnt being charged too much and the second is to make sure that the insurance companies are taking in sufficient money to honor all of the promises that they have made . The real cost of automobile insurance is determined when you have a claim . If the policy limit is exceeded and angry people are suing you , you paid too much for your insurance . If your policy had high limits and took care of everything , then you bought cheap insurance . Having to settle a claim out of your own pocket is the most expensive form of insurance that you can purchase . The reason that insurance premiums increase is that the company pays out more than it can afford to pay out . It is a simple balance sheet calculation . When the company finds that they are paying out more in claims than they are receiving in premiums they file with the state insurance commissioner to review and adjust rates in your state . Several things cause the claims experience of a company to increase . It could be that the frequency of claims increases . This could be the result of reduced safety enforcement , poorer road conditions or a variety of other causes . It could be that the severity of claims has increased . This would be the result of an increasing number of accidents turning into lawsuits . It also could be caused by juries making increasingly high awards to those injured in accidents . It also could be the result of increased medical costs in your area . Another factor could be the cost of auto repairs . Materials and parts tend to become more expensive over time and this could affect the claims experience of a company . It is important to note that most companies in the state will feel similar pressure at the same time as those factors affect all the companies . There are moral factors that also come to affect the premiums of auto insurance . When drivers report fewer annual miles than they actually drive , that increases their exposure without increasing the premium for their policy . If people allow other drivers to operate their vehicles without adequate supervision of screening risky drivers could be populating the streets . Even though your state requires that vehicles be insured we all know that some are not and that expense has to be shared somewhere . A frequent abuse is the pizza delivery man who is driving the family sedan . His insurance policy never knew he was doing that and has a risk that hasnt been properly evaluated . There are far more lurid cases but my all-time favorite is the family sedan that has steel tanks welded underneath the body to carry illegal liquor . All these moral issues also affect the premium .
When you first purchased your term life insurance policy , one of the options you designated was the term length -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- in which the premium would remain locked in place for and could not increase . At the end of the designated term length premium guarantee period , the policy will do one of two things : 1 -RRB- the premiums will begin to increase each year by a substantial margin -LRB- based on age -RRB- 2 -RRB- the premiums will remain the same , but the death benefit will rapidly decrease -LRB- this method is only used on some term policies that are issued on a universal life chassis -RRB- What you will commonly see is the first method . For example , if you purchased a 20 year term policy and outlive the 20 year period , the premiums will start increasing in year 21 . Since the premiums will keep going up and up , most people replace the term policy with a new life insurance policy -LRB- term or permanent - depending on need and age -RRB- to create a new premium guarantee period . Note - the new policy will feature a higher rate structure -LRB- for the same coverage structure -RRB- as your older and due to any changes in health history - to accommodate this , you can adjust the face amount or length of coverage to reduce the premium of the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Term life insurance is n't necessarily better than permanent life insurance - each has their own pros and cons . In short , it depends on what you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. covering a mortgage vs. estate planning -RRB- . The big advantage of term insurance is you 're getting more `` bang for your buck '' so-to-speak - meaning the rate per $ 1,000 of coverage that you 're paying is much less than permanent coverage , however , the trade-off is that you only get to pay that rate for a short amount of time -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- whereas your rates can be locked in for life with a permanent insurance policy . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the policy changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis -RRB- . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . You can send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button if you would like assistance with your program .
With term life insurance , rates increase when the term ends . E.g. . If you have a 20 year Term policy that costs $ 50/mo , the rate could increase to over $ 500/mo at the end of the 20 years . Your choices at that time are to buy a new policy -LRB- if you can qualify for one -RRB- or go without life insurance . If your policy has a conversion feature , you could convert your policy to permanent before the term ends . With permanent life insurance , it is possible that the premiums will never increase . It depends on whether you buy whole life , universal life , or a variation of either . If you already own a policy , you can consult your policy and look at the guaranteed premium to see if your policy premiums will increase in the future .
How much is life insurance for a 21 year old ? The amount of premium depends on several different factors . These factors are basically the same for any person at any age . It depends on the type of life insurance you are buying . Term insurance is generally cheaper for the term of the contract . However , once that term has expired the premiums usually increase . Whole-life insurance offers premiums that will not increase for the life of the insured as long as all premiums are kept current , as well as any other conditions of the contract . This allows for the young person to budget for the premiums over the course of the life of the insured . Whole-life insurance takes a little longer to mature . Therefore , just about the time the term insurance is about to run the course of the policy the whole-life insurance should be maturing . A good combination of these products covers the short-term needs , as well as , the long-term needs . There are also universal life policies to be considered . These products offer flexible premium amounts . Fixed annuities are considered a form of life insurance and these are beneficial for retirement . All of these products are great for the young person to consider and each has its advantages and disadvantages . Therefore , a well-balanced portfolio is essential so you can make use of all the advantages offered and limit the disadvantages of each product . In addition to the type of insurance you are purchasing , your gender , health , tobacco use or non-use , recent hospitalizations and sometimes your hobbies and career etc. will all be considered when calculating the premiums .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Quickly Can You Get Homeowners Insurance ?
Most companies extend binding authority to appointed agents . You should be able to get evidence of insurance within a very short period of time . The agent then submits the application to underwriting and they have sixty days during which they can review and decline the risk . The parties to the insurance policy receive legal notice of cancellation should that occur which gives them ample time to secure coverage elsewhere .
You should be able to get a policy the same day or the next day . Most insurance agent 's have binding authority , which means that if they can get enough information and if you meet a certain set of criteria , they can say you are covered now and you are covered now , even without paperwork . That being said , a lot can change if the agent has n't visted the property and completed an inspection , so I always recommend giving an agent at least 1 week of notice so they have a chance to come by and look at the property condition , put together some coverage options , and meet with you to review those options as policy can vary hugely from one company to another and depending on what options you choose .
That is an excellent question ! There are a couple of things that will determine how quickly you can obtain your license . The first is how quickly you can become enrolled in , and complete your State required training class . -LRB- There may also be company required training that you might need to complete before being able to sell , btw ... -RRB- You will also need to schedule and take your State exam , and get your fingerprinting and background checks done . It is a really wise idea to look into getting your Errors & Omissions insurance while in the process also , so that you can hit the ground running once licensed . So depending upon how well you learn and test , and how easy it is to get everything scheduled , you can expect your licensing within a couple of weeks , to a cople of months . If you would like to know how it went for me , please contact me , and I 'll talk to you privately about it . Thank you for asking !
Getting life insurance can take from one day to several months . If you are getting a policy that does not require a physical and that can be signed digitally , it can be in effect in as short as a day . If you are applying for a large policy and have health conditions that require the gathering of medical records , the process can take much longer . The determining factor is often how quickly the doctor records are received , how quickly the exam is completed , and whether the underwriter adds additional requirements after doing their review .
Filling out the life insurance application itself takes about 30 minutes for a medically underwritten policy -LRB- one that requires a paramed exam -RRB- . Having your drivers license , the date of birth and possibly Social Security numbers of your beneficiaries , and all your doctors ' information on hand will save time in filling it out . Once the application is submitted , you will take your free exam in your home or other place of your choice . Sometimes medical records are ordered . The time it takes complete the process depends partly on how quickly you take your exam and how quickly records are obtained . If you apply for a policy without an exam , the policy is issued much more quickly .
It can take from hours to months to be approved for life insurance . If you are applying for a simplified issue policy that requires no exam or medical records , can be signed digitally and approved on the phone , it may go into effect very quickly . The cons : this type of policy does not dig too deep , and can decline you very easily if you do not fit their exact criteria . They also usually charge higher rates to cover the risk of not knowing everything about you . The pros are that you get by without the hassle of an exam and can get the coverage very quickly . When applying for a larger policy that does require an exam and medical records , the time in underwriting largely depends on when you schedule your exam and how long it takes for your doctor 's office to send your records to the life insurance company . Another thing that can hold up approval is if you saw a doctor that the underwriter wants input from , but records were not ordered from that doctor , or the doctor has left and no one knows where those records are . Finally , an insurance website or agency that is not skilled at working this type of case can slow things down by simply not knowing how to stay on top of cases like this . To speed up approvals for a case involving exam and medical records : 1 -RRB- use an agent who has experience in impaired risk underwriting ; 2 -RRB- list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , and all doctors who made your diagnoses ; 3 -RRB- schedule your exam ASAP ; 4 -RRB- notify your doctors that medical records will be ordered , or obtain the records yourself ; and 5 -RRB- answer all questions from your agent and/or case manager promptly . These tips can cut the time for approval , even in a complicated case , from months to weeks .
That depends on how quickly the requirements for proof of death are met and if there were any extenuating circumstances that would require investigation . Most companies are going to make the within a relatively short period of time . They want family members to be able to get on with their lives less financial burdens as quickly as possible . To find out how your life insurance policy is handled , call your local agent and discuss it with them .
No , you ca n't get life insurance on your dad without his consent . If you are trying to secure some funding for final expenses when your father passes away , here are some tips that might help him consent to your purchasing coverage on him . 1 -RRB- Tell him you love him , and what a good provider he has been for your family . 2 -RRB- Maybe bring up a situation that caused you to think of buying life insurance for him . E.g. . When a friend or uncle died . And how it got you to thinking about what you would do if your father died . 3 -RRB- Explain that life insurance pays a death benefit quickly , without going through probate . This allows survivors to pay bills quickly and focus on supporting one another , rather than worrying about how to pay the bill . 4 -RRB- Use a simplified or guaranteed issue policy that does not ask a lot of health questions and does not need an exam . If you use a policy that pays the death benefit from day one , you will need to get your father 's health history . If guaranteed issue policy , it will be graded , but he can not be declined . 5 -RRB- Make sure he understands what will be required , be that a phone interview , drafting from his checking account -LRB- unless you are paying the premium -RRB- , etc. . With guaranteed issue policies , nothing is required but his signature on the application .
With some No Exam policies , you can have life insurance set up and in effect within 24 hours . With policies that require an exam , it largely depends on : 1 -RRB- how quickly you do your exam , 2 -RRB- whether medical records are ordered , and 3 -RRB- if medical records are ordered , how quickly they are received by the life insurance companies . If you have a health condition that requires getting records from several doctors , do not be alarmed if the process takes 3-5 months . Keep in mind that the more thoroughly your health history is reviewed , the chances are nearly zero that your payment would be declined if death occurred during the policy 's first two years -LRB- the contestibility period -RRB- . However , even with a health condition , medically underwritten policies do not normally take that long . Working with a reputable agency who keeps you up to date during underwriting can cut down the time a lot .
I am so glad you asked this question . Life insurance is an underwriting-driven sale . A well-managed underwriting process will yield both good pricing and good service . This is what you need to keep the client satisfied . The underwriter has the final word . At the same time , the client , the broker , the general agent , the case manager and the underwriter all collaborate in making things happen . In addition , third-parties such as physicians offices , and advisers such as accountants and attorneys and bankers , all have a role to play . Let me give you some examples of how things could work the right way , and also the wrong way . The right way can get you an approval in a matter of weeks . The wrong way can drag it out to months and months and months . First of all , you as the client must go through full disclosure . Answer every question thoroughly and accurately . Make sure you get prequalified so that any underwriting challenges are addressed before you submit a formal application . You might have to clarify elements of your medical history . You might have to give details on risky activities such as mountain climbing a scuba diving . Amendments to physician records may be needed . If all this information is collected up front , then you can benefit in two ways . First of all you can be confident that you have both competitive and reliable quotes . Your application should be approved at the rate quoted . In addition , the underwriting process should run more smoothly because a number of underwriting requirements have already been obtained . If you dont get prequalified , and underwriting challenges are not addressed before hand , then all the time needed to do so will delay the formal underwriting process . It is also important to get the insurance exam completed quickly . Those lab and test results are essential to evaluating the level of risk you present . It may be that your blood chemistry is off the day you take the exam , and that might raise some questions . You might even have to repeat the exam . Or clarification may be needed from your doctor . Better to take care of these items sooner rather than later . The longer you wait in scheduling that exam , the longer the evaluation will take , and the longer it will take to remedy any emerging issues . Medical records are also a dealmaker or a dealbreaker . They too play a huge role in assessing risk . These days many physician offices are short-staffed and overloaded with bureaucratic insurance company and government requirements . They often contract with services to make copies of records . Their turnover of requests for copies of files is often slow . Bear in mind that they are paid in advance and well paid for this service . You as the patient may have to get involved to stress the importance of a faster turnaround . Many times , statements and documents from professional advisors are needed . In one case I have , I obtained a medical approval of great pricing over six months ago . However , copies of trust and buy sell agreement documents are required to get the final approval , and to issue the policies . The attorneys and accountants still havent delivered . General agents play a key role in delivering customer satisfaction . Brokers typically do not deal directly with underwriters - we deal with general agents who operate at the wholesale level . A general agent who has strong leverage with carriers will be able to deliver underwriting concessions . He or she will also be able to intervene as needed and advocate on behalf of the client and broker if snags pop up during underwriting . Things can happen . Sometimes one underwriter will prequalify a case , and another will formally underwrite it . These two may not agree on what the price should be . The general agent needs to stay on top of this and get the dispute resolved as quickly as possible . Case managers are also key . These are personnel inside general agencies who expedite requirements . If they are really on the ball , then the broker is notified promptly of the need for outstanding records , documents , client information , etc. . If they are slack , then requirements are filled too slowly . I think too many agencies just rely on software to give updates . This technology is useful ; at the same time , managers really do need to stay involved personally with cases and move them along . It takes the personal touch . In essence , with the right team approach and cooperation from all involved , then things can happen relatively quickly . The broker needs to treat underwriting as such and provide proper direction . Without this leadership , there is so much room for error that underwriting can become a nightmare .
Determining how much term life insurance is enough can be accomplished with a life insurance calculator , or -LRB- easier yet -RRB- visiting with a life insurance agent who can guide you . These methods will help you look at the purposes for your coverage : e.g. to pay off your mortgage , put your children through college , etc. . Then they show you the amount of life insurance needed to cover those . Some people use a very simple guideline of getting a face amount equal to 10 times their annual income , and that is fine . But you may have a disabled child who will need care for his/her lifetime . Or maybe you are an investor in housing and need to protect multiple mortgages . So your need would be beyond what the average person needs . Again , having an agent to help can save you lots of headaches . You may need to make some compromises , and a qualified agent can show where you can give and take . How much life insurance you can get is also partly based on your income , so an ethical agent can get you to your goal quickly and within your budget . Please feel free to contact me or others on this website for advice at any time .
Sewer Backup Coverage is an essential coverage on Homeowners Insurance policies . On standard Homeowners Insurance policies , the coverage usually can be purchased as an optional endorsement ; in many cases , the carriers will offer $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 per incident for a premium of $ 20 - $ 75 per year . On High Value Homeowners policies , the coverage may be included in the policy form and in some cases offer coverage at the same limit as other perils covered under Coverage A - Dwelling . Sewer/Drain backup coverage will provide coverage should your drains become blocked and the water backs up causing water damage to your home . It is always important for a homeowner to check the drains annually and make sure that the water runs quickly through the drainage system without any obstacles ; there are liquids available for purchase at hardware stores that advertisethe clearing of drains but it may be more prudent to contact a plumbing professional for the best advice ! You may contact your insurance carrier to add this valuable coverage to your current policy or you may obtain a quote with the coverage included . For quotes in Arizona , California & Nevada , you may follow the link : WEBSITELINK
Extended Home Insurance coverage provides an additional amount of funds in the case that the estimated cost to rebuild a home is more than what the Coverage A limits allow for . This extra coverage would come in handy during a large disaster affecting several properties at the same time in one area . In this situation , the cost of materials and labor may jump quickly due to the high demand as homeowners want their properties rebuilt quickly . Since this is not something that can be predicted , some insurance policies allow for this extra coverage . In most cases , 125 % extended coverage is included in the premium price , but you can also select 150 % extended coverage as well . And , since this coverage does not increase your premium by the same amount it increases your Coverage A limits , it is a very affordable addition and highly recommended .
Whenever you experience a loss , it is best to the claim as quickly as you can . This will allow the claim to get settled as quickly as possible and allow you to get repairs done sooner . If you wait to file a claim , the processing of the claim may take longer as the adjuster will need to verify everything for the claim and some things may have changed with the items involved in the incident .
To claim water damage with your homeowner 's insurance , simply contact your company and explain to them that you have water damage and that you would like to file a claim . But one thing to keep in mind is that not every type of loss associated with water is covered by a homeowner 's policy . Most water losses that are covered happen suddenly -LRB- burst pipe , washing machine overflow , etc. -RRB- and are not from slowly developing things -LRB- slow dripping pipe -RRB- . Things like floods and tidal water are not covered under a homeowner 's policy and require coverage from a separate flood insurance policy . The best thing you can do for a loss related to water is mitigate the damages as quickly as possible , and prevent any further damages from occurring . Thanks for asking !
The best place to get a free car insurance quote is from an experienced broker -LRB- 20 year of experience , or more -RRB- and their reputable website . Why ? Because that 's our job and we do it well ! Customers can quickly get free quotes online from the top-rated companies in minutes . The rates they view will be the lowest available prices and you pay no fees when utilizing a broker . Whether you have current coverage or need it quickly , our job is to help you , and that 's exactly what happens !
How long have they been around . How quickly do they pay . How difficult are the to deal with and/or approve a claim . Do they have a local agent you can actually see , talk with and meet with . Is that agent actually interested in what is best for you . Do they have the type of policies you need and are looking for . Are they interested in covering someone like you , and with the health issues you might have . What are their rates and can you afford the coverage you need . Thank you . GARY LANE .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
There are some life insurance policies that can be purchased as quickly as one day . When applying for very large face amounts , and/or if an exam and medical records are required , the time that it takes the policy to go into effect can be weeks or months . To get life insurance most quickly , use a No Exam Life Insurance policy and ask the usual time it takes to go into effect , as some are much more speedy than others .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will My Friend 's Insurance Cover A Tree Falling On My Uninsured Boat ?
You would be looking at paying for the repairs out-of-pocket . Insurance on a vehicle only covers the vehicle -LRB- s -RRB- designated for the coverage . For example , your friend 's insurance would only cover vehicle -LRB- s -RRB- covered under his plan , which from your information would indicate your boat is not covered . Some policies may have liability coverage if the insured person 's property damaged someone else 's property , but that does not appear to be the case here . Given that a tree fell on it , your boat would only be covered if you had insurance on it .
Actually , that depends upon a couple of factors . Your friend apparently has homeowners ' insurance which would include liability coverage , so one factor seems to be met . The question then becomes about the condition of your friend 's tree . If the tree is healthy and is just taken down or damaged in a passing storm , then your friend 's policy would not cover the damage to your boat . If on the other hand , the tree is dead or diseased AND your friend knows it AND has done nothing to remove or have the affected branches pruned away , your friend would be seen as negligent . If that is the case , then the liability portion of his Homeowners ' policy would provide coverage .
Actually , that depends upon a couple of factors . Your friend apparently has homeowners ' insurance which would include liability coverage , so one factor seems to be met . The question then becomes about the condition of your friend 's tree . If the tree is healthy and is just taken down or damaged in a passing storm , then your friend 's policy would not cover the damage to your boat . If on the other hand , the tree is dead or diseased AND your friend knows it AND has done nothing to remove or have the affected branches pruned away , your friend would be seen as negligent . If that is the case , then the liability portion of his Homeowners ' policy would provide coverage .
You would be looking at paying for the repairs out-of-pocket . Insurance on a vehicle only covers the vehicle -LRB- s -RRB- designated for the coverage . For example , your friend 's insurance would only cover vehicle -LRB- s -RRB- covered under his plan , which from your information would indicate your boat is not covered . Some policies may have liability coverage if the insured person 's property damaged someone else 's property , but that does not appear to be the case here . Given that a tree fell on it , your boat would only be covered if you had insurance on it .
It 's the homeowner 's responsibility to remove dead or damaged trees before they fall . Homeowners insurance will not cover dead or damaged trees . Homeowners insurance will cover resulting damage and the cost to cut up the tree if the trees falls on covered property . If a tree falls over but does not hit covered property , there is no coverage . If your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , your neighbor is only responsible for the portion of the tree located on his property . The portion of the tree on your property is your responsibility even though it 's not your tree .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
This is really more of a legal question than an insurance question but I 'll give you some guidelines . As a general rule , if it 's on your property , it 's your responsibility . So , legally , if it 's your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , he should take care of it . This does n't always happen , and many small battles have ensued over just this type of thing . I 've seen neighbors do some pretty weird things in these situations . I 've seen people send registered letters , call the police , report to the city or township , even hire a lawyer to sue . My advice , be reasonable and talk to your neighbor , preferably before it falls , and come to some aggreement about what needs to be done , if anything . From an insurance standpoint , nothing 's really going to be done with a fallen tree unless it falls on something an causes damage . Then , in most cases , your insurance company will pay to move it off of your home , that 's it . Some homeowners policies will have endorsements available for debris removal which may pay to remove it , usually up to some limit . Many times , though , removing it from a structure is all an insurance company will do and removing the tree from your property is your responsibility .
OK , this will be a quick run down of coverages most commonly needed but the answer may vary some form state to state : The first coverage you need is Bodily Injury Liability . This is the amount of coverage you need to protect yourself from the claims and law suits of people you injure . The second but related coverage is the Property damage coverage for property you destroy . So it is common in the US to sell them in groups such as 100/300/100 . Now what does that mean : The first number is critical . This is the per person limit of bodily injury liability . Insurers are not stupid . They know that in 75 % of all accidents , there will be one person in each vehicle -LRB- it is just the way Americans drive -RRB- So , there is a lot less likelihood of hitting that 300,000 but it would take injury to more than one person to do it . So the odds are with your insurer . Another way to buy insurance -LRB- usually about 10 % more in cost -RRB- is through Combined Single Limits coverage , CSL gives you one bulk sum to pay the claim more as the accident happened rather than based on the sub limits of your policy . So split limits are the norm , but for a little more you might want combined single limit coverage . The next coverage is usually PIP or Medical Payments . Both of these sort of compensate for usually minor events for which the party is injured and you want to take care of the injury regardless of fault . For example you give a ride to a friend who slams the door on his finger . Yes it was his fault , but it was your car and you do n't want suing you over this . Your policy responds with either medical payment or Personal Injury . PIP is usually broader and often includes wages loss which Med Pay does not . The next group of coverages are usually the most important on your policy . These are your uninsured or under-insured motorist coverage . In about 14 % of accidents the at fault party will have no insurance . And in the next grouping of the accidents you will see coverage of the at fault party at state minimums or not much more . . Now you need the protection of UM coverage . A good rule of thumb is never buy less UM than you have for Bodily Injury Liability . This is now you protecting yourself , your family and passengers in your car . It is perhaps the most little understood coverage and most important part of your policy.Lastly as respects UM/UIM you need Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Property Damage at a level commensurate with the ACV of you car . Next come the coverages on the physical damage to your car . The coverages are Comprehensive or also called OTC or Other than Collision . which covers many perils such as theft , fire , flood , trees falling on the vehicle etc. . Collision occurs when you hit something such as a tree , a road curb , a pothole , another vehicle etc. . This is where the value of your car is a consideration . You should also select a deductible that is right for you and your household budget From here we go to many ancillary coverages including Rental Reimbursement which is usually stated as a dollar limit for thirty days -LRB- enough time usually to get your car repaired -RRB- > The coverage is triggered by another cause of loss such as collision . The next and perhaps last coverage to consider for the general public is towing or as some companies offer road side assistance . Towing is just that towing . Whereas roadside service is usually sign and drive towing , run out of gas , lock out of car etc. . Now if you have a new car you might want replacement coverage or if leased gap coverage for loan or lease . If you do n't understand any of this gives us a call , We believe an educated consumer is better for every one .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
If you are asking if homeowners insurance covers a tree falling on your home . The answer is more than likely yes if the tree falling was caused by a covered peril . Bear in mind that their are exclusion within every policy . If you are asking about damage to the tree itself . Once again if the tree falling is because of a covered peril there may be some coverage for the tree itself . As always read over your policy completely or give your local agent a call and discuss your questions or concern to ensure that you understand your coverages .
If no one heard it fall did it make a sound when the tree crushed your car . OK , could not help myself . Your automobile comprehensive coverage would cover the damage from a falling limb . As for going after a homeowner , it 's almost impossible to prove negligence unless the homeowner had been warned both verbally and in writing that his or her tree presented a hazard . Otherwise it 's simply an act of God and the property owner is not liable . This happens allot actually . My best advise is to avoid parking under trees . If the limbs do n't get you the sap and birds will .
It depends . Where does it fall?What caused it to fall ? A tree struck by lightning is typically covered . A tree that falls due to wind is not covered unless itlands onyour property such as your home or auto . If it lands in your yard and causes no damage , there is no coverage for the tree itself . Your healthy tree that lands on your neighbor 's house is covered by their homeowners insurance not yours . Prior to making a claim , you should always talk to your trusted insurance advisor to verify your coverage .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Auto insurance will not cover a boat . In order to properly cover or insure your boat you would need boat insurance . However in most cases your auto insurance liability will extend to the boat and trailer while they are attached to yourvehicle The boat and trailer will not be covered for physical damage but should you be backing up the boat for example and hit an object or person there would be coverage for the other party from a liability standpoint . Talk to your local agent about protecting yourself when you have your boat in the water or in storage with boat insurance .
Typical policies cover fallen trees if they cause property damage , and if they fall due to a covered peril such as wind , lighting , etc. . If a tree just falls in the yard and does not damage anything then usually the policy will not cover the removal of the tree or a replacement tree . It must cause damage and be caused by a covered peril . Hope this helps .
Homeowners Insurance will not pay for dead tree removal . A tree is a plant and it is the homeowners obligation to show pride of ownership and to take care of his or her yard . Big plant or small it 's the homeowners responsibility to maintain . Also a dead tree just sitting there and has not caused any damage to the dwelling , therefore there is no claim . I know what your thinking . The tree is a potential hazard and could fall on the house and cause damage or hurt someone . If this were to happen and you were unaware of any potential hazard there would be coverage should the tree fall on your house . However , if you are aware the tree is a hazard and fail to mitigate the hazard you are negligent and are not living up to your obligation as a homeowners and risk having the claim denied .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
While in most cases it will not cover the tree itself it will cover the damage caused by a downed tree and if necessary removal of the tree from the damaged structure . If a tree falls on your house , the damage will be covered and the tree removed . The tree itself will not be replaced .
Because tree root damage is a process that happens over a period of time tree root damage would not be a covered loss . Covered losses would fall under sudden and accidental . Tree root damage is neither sudden nor accidental . In fact the damage is actually preventable if the tree is properly maintained or removed if necessary . Keep in mind , a tree is just a plant and your plants needs to be kept up . As beautiful as they are sometimes you have to take the ax to the tree .
The vision of boat varies dependent upon the person . For some a boat is a two person canoe and for others it is a 100 ft. yacht . Most homeowners policies provide coverage for a small pleasure boat . They generally exclude boats that have more than a specified amount of horse power . They will also restrict boats based upon their length . If you have a rowboat , call your agent and get a specific answer . If you have a ski boat call your agent for a quote on boat insurance .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is The Most Affordable Health Insurance In Indiana ?
There are many affordable health insurance plans in Indiana , thanks to the Affordable Care Act , also known as Obamacare . What reduces rates -LRB- often dramatically -RRB- , is the federal subsidy that is based on your household income . Often , this can generate financial help of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 per year . And this money is automatically deducted from the premium . Anthem typically offers the the lowest rates , although Humana is competitive in many areas . Both individual and family plans are available along with coverage for small businesses . If household income is too high to qualify for a subsidy , off-Exchange plans can be purchased from the participating major carriers . Where do you get the best rates ? Typically , an experienced broker website will offer the lowest prices along with expert advice . There are never fees or charges for utilizing this type of assistance . I should know since I 'm an Indiana health insurance broker and have been in the business for 33 years . But it does n't seem that long !
There are many affordable health insurance plans in Indiana , thanks to the Affordable Care Act , also known as Obamacare . What reduces rates -LRB- often dramatically -RRB- , is the federal subsidy that is based on your household income . Often , this can generate financial help of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 per year . And this money is automatically deducted from the premium . Anthem typically offers the the lowest rates , although Humana is competitive in many areas . Both individual and family plans are available along with coverage for small businesses . If household income is too high to qualify for a subsidy , off-Exchange plans can be purchased from the participating major carriers . Where do you get the best rates ? Typically , an experienced broker website will offer the lowest prices along with expert advice . There are never fees or charges for utilizing this type of assistance . I should know since I 'm an Indiana health insurance broker and have been in the business for 33 years . But it does n't seem that long !
Low cost health insurance in Indiana is available and can be purchased from an experienced broker -LRB- with the help of their website -RRB- . Anthem and UnitedHealthcare are two of the biggest carriers in the state . They offer a wide variety of single , family and business healthcare plans . As a broker for more than 32 years , our job is to determine which plan best matches the needs you have and the budget you have to work with . The Indian Health Insurance Exchange has an Open Enrollment that offers four types of plans with financial subsidies . Do you qualify for subsidies ? Which plan is the most economical ? Will your pre-existing conditions be covered ? These are some of the topics that our websites offer along with free online quoting and comparison of plans . Indiana has many affordable options .
Comparing health insurance quotes in Indiana is very simple and you 'll be able to view the best prices from the top-rated companies . Typically , utilizing an experienced broker 's website will yield you the best rates . As an experienced broker myself , with a premier trusted website , we utilize modern software and are able to research and find the best offers . The Indiana Health Insurance Exchange allows you to apply for many affordable plans through Anthem and a few other carriers . No medical questions need to be answered and during Open Enrollment , your acceptance is virtually guaranteed . The new Marketplace will also provide a federal tax subsidy of your income is under 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level .
Brandon is right . That is way too broad of a question to answer specifically . But there are studies that are done every year comparing auto insurance premiums from state to state . In the 2014 study , Indiana ranked # 12 in the country for having the lowest auto insurance premium . Compared to most states , Indiana does n't have that many coverage requirements as other states do .
Yes possibly . Indiana has an inheritance tax that life insurance can be included in . Spouses are exempt , but most other kin and non-related persons to the insured could incur the inheritance tax . In Indiana the tax ranges from 1 to 20 % and is due 9 months after death .
When a beneficiary in Indiana collects the death benefit from a life insurance policy upon the death of the insured person , the life insurance proceeds are protected from creditors in Indiana . Creditors could go after the life insurance proceeds if the beneficiary was a co-signer to the debts of the Insured . They could also collect on the life insurance money if the beneficiary was left to the estate .
With more than 33 years of experience as a broker -LRB- and fully licensed in Indiana -RRB- , I 'll answer your question . That depends . I know ... That 's not a specific answer . But there are many variables that impact the rate ... such as your age , where in Indiana you live , the type of coverage etc. . . A federal subsidy may also drastically reduce your rate . Many of my Hoosier clients are quite surprised when notified of the magnitude of the discount .
During Open Enrollment , you can not be denied health insurance in Indiana -LRB- assuming you meet eligibility guidelines -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- also provides a federal subsidy that can potentially reduce your premium . The amount is based on household income . When Open Enrollment ends , assuming you do not have a qualifying event , a short-term policy -LRB- which is not ACA-compliant -RRB- can be applied for . But you CAN be denied for this type of coverage .
It is really impossible to say any one company is `` best '' for all situations . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents all the major companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . If you are eligible for financial assistance from the Affordable Care act , you should also make sure the agent you speak to is certified to sell on the exchange . There are only a small number of companies offering `` Omabacare '' plans in Indiana at this time . In some counties , Anthem Blue Cross is the only company available on the exchange at all . They do offer several different plans , with varying costs and coverage .
The most popular plan offered by the Colonial Penn Life Insurance Company is their guaranteed acceptance life insurance . The maximum face amount offered for that product is $ 8,000 . They do offer a few other products as well , with the maximum face amount of $ 50,000 for one and $ 25,000 for the rest . As far as I know , their life insurance is fine . Since it does not require an exam , you may be able to find lower prices elsewhere for those aimed to persons with good health . Their parent company , CNO Financial Group , is based in Indiana . Colonial Penn Life Insurance Company is rated B + + by AM Best .
Yes , the Farm Bureau does offer life insurance . You can contact your state Farm Bureau to find an agent . Or you can get a quote via the internet from United Home Life , of whom the parent company is United Farm Family Life Insurance Co , which operates as a subsidiary of the Indiana Farm Bureau . UHL provides life insurance in most states .
Effective 1/1/2014 nobody can be denied health insurance in Indiana or any other state in the country . However , you will need to enroll in a policy during the enrollment period or else you 'll be unable to get insurance unless you fall under a special enrollment circumstance . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run your own personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
Car insurance is priced based on risk of a specific situation , so there is a lot of variation in price from person to person depending on his or her risk profile . With this understanding , according to the National Association of Insurance Commissioners , the average cost of auto insurance in the state of Indiana is about $ 625 per year .
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance but has recently suspended Long Term Care sales in California , Arizona , Connecticut , Hawaii , Indiana , Nevada and New York . There has not been a formal announcement as to whether they plan to reintroduce products in those states in the future .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
Life insurance is not charged income tax in Indiana or any other state , as long as the beneficiary is a person . If the beneficiary is the estate , the proceeds will be subject to income tax . Also , interest paid on the face amount for cash value policies can be taxed . Federal and state estate taxes also are charged on the excess over the exempt amount .
That would depend on which state you 're comparing it to . but overall , Indiana is on the lower end as far as auto insurance premium . There are companies who track state averages . In the most recent 2014 rankings that includes 50 states + D.C. , Indiana ranked 12th for the least expensive state .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Who Can Get Auto Insurance ?
The owner of a vehicle needs to maintain insurance . Insurance always follows the vehicle so regardless of who is driving the car the owners insurance is primary . If someone other than yourself is going to be driving your car you need to list them on your policy as a driver . The driver can be classified as primary or occasional depending on how often they will be using your car .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
There are several carriers who would offer an 18 year old in Minnesota car insurance coverage . What 's probably important to you is who will give you the best coverage at the lowest price . To get this , you should seek out the help of an agent who is licensed to sell auto insurance in your state who can show you various auto insurance quotes .
No one auto insurer has the best product for all people all the time . And auto insurance carriers have varying appetites for risk that varies greatly on a regional basis . Therefore no one can categorically declare one auto insurer best for all residents of one state . Your best bet is to seek out the guidance of an agent who is licensed to write auto insurance in your state and have him or her show you numerous quotes for auto insurance so you can determine which is best for you .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Carriers often have a minimum limit of coverage for which they will issue a policy . For renters this might be as low as 20,000 or 25,000 dollars of contents coverage and a minimum of say 100,000 in liability coverage . Talk it over with your agent and let him or her know your situation . Keep in mind that carriers often provide a discount to consumers who bundle their auto and home insurance with the same company . In fact it is not uncommon in some of the states we write business in , that the consumer gets enough discount for having the auto policy as well that the savings pays for the bulk of the renters policy . So , shop for the best you can afford and start with your auto insurer or agent who handles your auto coverage .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
There a few options for coverage for this . 1st the person who owns the building that you are renting from it should cover damage to your auto 1st . But if you have to fight with them there is another option . If you have comprehensive coverage on your car then you could claim it on your auto policy and get it covered minus your deductible How ever you auto carrier may deny the claim or they will try and get the money from your landlords home policy . Either way you should be able to get your car repaired .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover your auto while in the garage . Homeowners insurance covers the home and not autos . Only your auto insurance policy can protect your auto while in the garage . If you have an auto you do not drive and just store in your garage I would recommend purchasing comprehensive coverage only on your auto .
Yes they do but most agents ca n't issue it in many states . However you can get it online and still keep your auto with an agent and still get the multipolicy discount . I just suggested to one of our clients to do this and it had her auto policy lowered160 .00 for 6 months just by getting the renters policy . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive and well worth it many cases your auto lowers so much that it is almost like getting your renters policy for free Talk to your local agent they can help you .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
You can have two auto policies but not on the same car . I have many clients that own small business and they have a business auto policy and a personal auto policy which then gives them a multi policy discount on the personal auto and cost them much less per auto and the business auto they use the insurance premium as a business expense on their taxes .
Uber is an interesting new concept and with it there are new questions . Without reading your policy I can only give you a general answer but the personal auto policies I have read and studied have an exclusion related to the use of the auto to carry passengers for a fee without an endorsement modifying the limitation . I snagged this particular exclusion language for you from the ISO Personal Auto Policy -LRB- a common base for auto insurers to use in creating coverage -RRB- : For that `` insured 's '' liability arising out of ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . Source : ISO Personal Auto Policy PP 00 01 01 05 . There might be newer versions but this has been a longstanding limitation in the personal auto policy .
Great question ! Many insurance companies offer multiple car discounts and I have seen substantial savings for couples who combine their auto policies . A good agent will be able to place you with the right company that will provide the best discount for your combined policy . That said , there is no reason a couple needs to wait to get married to get an auto policy together . I have written policies for stable couples who have an established relationship without yet being married . Please let me know if I can be of any assistance ! Carl Houde
Yes it is possible to have auto insurance if you do not own a vehicle . This is called non owned auto coverage . Insurance like this is generally issued for those trying to get their license back after a suspension but could also be purchased if you wish your insurance to not gap . Talk to your local independent agent who can find you a insurance carrier that offers non owned auto coverage .
Almost anyone can get life insurance . The only people who CAN NOT get life insurance are those who have serious health problems and who fall outside the age guidelines for guaranteed issue ; those who do not have any income at all -LRB- but even they may be able to get a policy with a cap on the face amount -RRB- ; and in the US , those who do not have citizenship , a green card , or work visa .
USAA is a very good and large insurer that operates as an auto insurer and as such may be higher or lower than a competitor . A few years ago my daughter moved from USAA to another independent agency company and was able to buy a renters policy , and auto policy and an umbrella all for less than her USAA auto policy . All auto insurance is regulated by individual states , so you can expect that an usurer can reflect its appetite for auto insurance in that state in its pricing . No company can be the least expensive in every state for every set of conditions . That is not a realistic expectation . You should be aware too that insurers often build elaborate rating algorithms which can produce several million price points across their business in a particular state . So your carrier may believe that a 16 year old with Corvette is not insurable to that carrier while another insurer might say the exposure is fine since they are exacting what they consider an adequate rate for the exposure .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Who Has The Best Rates On Car Insurance ?
Who has the best rates on car insurance and where do you get them ? When you utilize the free services of an experienced broker , you 'll be able to find the lowest prices much easier than attempting to shop yourself . Whether it 's State Farm , Farmers , Geico , Progressive , Esurance or another carrier , shopping for the best car insurance rate is not fun . That 's why we simply the process for you by utilizing our experience , websites and modern software to save you money .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Lets say you have a hundred friends and each has an automobile . If they could agree that they wanted to have enough money to pay legal expenses that they might have if they are responsible for an accident , you could form an insurance company . If you were able to determine -LRB- from actuarial studies -RRB- the amount of money you could anticipate spending in helping each other out in the coming year and the amount was $ 50,000 you would then know the basic share for each friend , $ 500 -LRB- $ 50,000 / 100 -RRB- Someone in your group will probably object because they only take their car to shows once or twice a year and certainly dont have the exposure the rest of the friends have . Another will object because they live on a farm and rarely drive into town -LRB- although it might be a long ways . -RRB- They will contend that their exposure is less than the other friends . Another friend will complain because one of the friends has a street-legal racing car and it is more likely that it will be involved in an accident . One of your friends has a drinking problem and no one really wants a share of his legal liability . And so it goes . What at one time seemed simple and logical becomes increasingly complex . Actuaries are a rare group of people who compile data and have the ability to slice that data in many different ways to determine the effects of the location where the car is garaged , average annual miles , credit risk of the owner , make , model and year of the vehicle . In fact , these actuaries can compute over 100 rating areas for an automobile . The point that this exercise makes is to distribute the risk that all of us face equitably . I have been asked if a red car costs more to insure than others . I am sure that a study somewhere has shown that red cars have a slightly higher than average accident rate . It is something that could be used in the rating process . I have been asked if a previously totaled car , now registered legally can be insured based upon that same concern for a fair premium . So actuaries give the insurance company many alternatives upon which they can design a rating scheme for an automobile . In my state the scheme is set by state law . Actually the California Constitution dictates how automobile policies will be rated . So legislative action can have a profound effect on automobile rating . Most states give authority to their insurance commissioner to regulate automobile insurance rates . Their charge is not so much to maintain fairness as it is to make sure that the companies take in enough premiums to pay the claims that are anticipated . In other words , the commissioner does everything in his or her power to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . Insurance companies keep very close tabs on the claims that they pay and the premiums that they take in . Actually the actuaries get involved in this as well , to determine if they are charging enough for every different type of coverage . When the company fails to receive enough premiums to pay all of the claims in a given year , they approach the commissioner and propose a rate increase . At this point the company has done everything possible to spread the risk appropriately , however , there are some areas that they want to adjust to make sure that the company is being fair and that the company can continue to keep its promises . That is how a company computes what it will charge you for your car .
When shopping for Medicare Supplement do not just go by rates . Many agents will tell you that all plans are the same and the only difference is rates , and that is true . However , I have seen many companies go in to an area with rates that are low , only to raise the rates by 30 % or more the following year . Unless you like changing plans every year and you know your health will always be good , this is not necessarily the best way to go . Look for a company that is competitive , but that has a good history of rate increases , generally less than 10 % . Every agent is getting solicited by companies wanting them to sell their now lowest rate plan . Find a good local agent who has been around for a while . I personally like the AARP Med Sup . It is competitive and has an excellent rate history . It also uses community rating versus attained age rating . With attained age , which most companies use , you pay a low rate at first but every year you can count on a rate increase just because you got older , in addition to the rate increase the company has . With community rating , the rates are equaled over the ages so that you pay a little more at 65 for example but when you are 85 your rates will be lower than if you went with an attained age company . Also look for an agent that also does Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug plans . He will be able to help you decide which would be to your best advantage .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Who the best Annuity Company is depends on a few different things . Mostly the current annuity market and who currently has the most competitive rates . It also depends on your personal situation and needs and which company offers a product that fits those needs best . In other words , there is no best annuity company , it just depends . But it is important to use a company that has good financial ratings , and `` A '' or better is usually considered a good rating . So whichever well rated company offers the most competitive product that fits your needs , is the best company .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Every rating agency has their own ratings . With AM Best , A + + is their best rating . With Fitch , their highest rating is AAA . Moody 's highest rating is Aaa . S&P 's best life insurance company rating is AAA . Weiss 's highest rating is A + . The companies with the best ratings will have high ratings from all these agencies .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
You can cancel at anytime . it is not the best idea to go with out insurance . If you are canceling because the car is not running or you no longer own the car and are looking for a replacement that is different . If your car is no longer working you can place just comprehensive coverage on it and no liability while it is disabled that way it has some protection on your car . But on the flip side . If you no longer own a car you can keep the insurance till you get a replacement car and be covered if you are borrowing someone 's car and they did n't pay their insurance . Also there is the option of non owned policy . Also when you start your insurance up again if you have gone more then 30 days with no coverage your rates increase for lack of proof of prior . Talk to your agent and see what works best for you . If you are canceling because of your budget talk to your agent and see what they can do to keep you covered and at a better rate .
There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' whole life rates . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . There are a number of factors that go into the calculation of rates for a policy , but that 's only one area to think about . Some carriers may offer participating whole life policies -LRB- paying dividends that can be used to buy paid-up additions , reduce the premiums , or pay cash to the policyowner -RRB- - other whole life policies may be non-participating -LRB- meaning they do not pay any dividends -RRB- . Another factor determining which program will be best for your needs is the risk class . People may qualify for different risk classes with each carrier because each person has a different medical history and each carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines -LRB- some carriers may be more aggressive in their underwriting and others may be more conservative -RRB- . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies to see who will offer you the lowest rates for what program you 're looking to set up .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
I caution anybody to not just assume anybody can drive your car . Most polices have permissive use , but keep in mind , the owner of the car and his insurance company are responsible if there is a loss as insurance follows the vehicle . Also your limits may be reduced to state minimums meaning if the accident exceeds the coverage amounts , the owner , although they were not in the accident can be held liable since the owner loaned the car out . Another thing to consider , permissive use in most cases does not apply to household members who do not have their own car and insurance . All household members who have access to the vehicle are required to be listed or excluded . There has been a great abuse of this by people who do not want to list children or relatives to avoid potentially higher premiums which have resulted in severe consequences when a claim arises And yet another thing to consider is there are carriers who do not have permissive use on their policy at all . If the carrier is unaware of the individual who is operating the vehicle there is no coverage on the owners policy . Always talk to your agent about how your particular policy works and the potential ramifications of loaning out your vehicle .
A lot of it depends on personal preference and what your concerns are . If you want to make sure it 's with a top-rated company who is financially strong and stable , you want to look at what their rating is -LRB- e.g. A.M. Best ratings : A , A + , and A + + indicate superior financial ratings -RRB- . If you 're looking at permanent , long-term coverage , you may want to look at the most stable companies because you want them to be there for the next 50 , 60 , 70 , years . If you 're only looking for a 10-year term insurance policy , you may be willing to look at a company with less favorable numbers because their rates are cheaper . It can also be helpful to look into reviews that people say about the company - positive aspects , any major continuous issues with claims , etc. ? The other major thing that everyone looks at is pricing - your premiums that you pay . There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' life insurance policy . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . This is because people may qualify for different risk classes -LRB- one of the single-most critical things to think about with coverage -RRB- , they may be looking to secure a different amount of coverage , keep the coverage for a different length of time , or may live in a different state -LRB- not every product from every carrier is available in every state -RRB- . All of these factors go into the calculation of rates . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies and make sure that the policy you apply for is best serving the desired needs that you want to have the coverage in place to protect .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does AARP Have Homeowners Insurance ?
AARP is not an insurance company , However The Hartford offers discounts to AARP members on both home and auto insurance . The Hartford has been in business for over 200 years and is a highly reputable insurance company . Just to note : not all Hartford agents are authorized to offer AARP discounts . AARP qualified agents must go though certain training and be approved before being able to offer The Hartford 's AARP product . You should easily be able to do a web search to find a local agent who can offer Hartford 's AARP product . I myself am an AARP authorized agent in the state of California .
AARP is not an insurance company . They are an organization that sells the use of their name and logo to insurance companies . The fine print on the insurance products actually says that the AARP organization does not recommend or endorse the AARP branded insurance products . The insurance products with the AARP logo are often not a great value . But that logo does work because many seniors think of it as a type of Consumer Reports for seniors . It is not . If you study the offerings of the insurance products that use the AARP brand , they do not always compare well . The life insurance with the AARP brand often says that they do not guarantee rates . That is a very important feature that most seniors want and can all easily find with most life insurance products that are marketed to seniors . The Medicare Supplements AARP/United Healthcare are exactly the same plan as offered by many other companies but in many states you will pay less if you shop other brands besides the AARP branded one . Your search should be for good health insurance . Not for a Health insurance company that pays for an AARP logo on their brochure .
A Medigap Plan purchased through AARP means you will have Medicare Supplement insurance through United Healthcare . Medigap Plans A , B , C , F , K , L and N are sold by AARP . In some states , AARP has Medigap SELECT plans . For example , if you have Medigap SELECT Plan F or C , you get all the benefits of those plans -- except you have to use the hospitals in the network directory to receive full hospital care benefits . Applicants must be AARP members or live in the same household and share the same AARP membership number . It 's important to note that Medigap Plan benefits are standardized ; so , Plan F with AARP is the same Plan F with another insurance company . The difference is the price . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can help you compare an AARP premium to other insurance companies . Many people like to do their own research and sometimes will end up with an insurance company such as AARP because it 's easy to call up and enroll . However , this ` easy ' process can often times equate to a higher premium . By working with an independent agent , you can compare an AARP premium to other insurance company premiums for the same Medigap Plan you desire . This will make sure you are getting the best priced Medigap Plan . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
AARP is not an insurance company , However The Hartford offers discounts to AARP members on both home and auto insurance . The Hartford has been in business for over 200 years and is a highly reputable insurance company . Just to note : not all Hartford agents are authorized to offer AARP discounts . AARP qualified agents must go though certain training and be approved before being able to offer The Hartford 's AARP product . You should easily be able to do a web search to find a local agent who can offer Hartford 's AARP product . I myself am an AARP authorized agent in the state of California .
AARP , the American Association for Retired Persons , is a lobbying group tied to a marketing organization . AARP does not write insurance , but does `` endorse '' certain insurance products in exchange for a kick back or other form of compensation . It is unwise to assume any insurance product endorsed by an association is always a good deal . When I have compared plans recommended by AARP vs. what the consumer can purchase on the open market through an independent agent , I rarely find the AARP endorsed plans to be of good value .
AARP Medigap plans are Medigap plans insured through United Healthcare . In short , AARP partnered with United Healthcare to attach their name to UHC 's products . As Medigap plans feature standardized benefits , the coverage under each Medigap plan is exactly the same as it would be if you purchased the coverage from another carrier . The main way the AARP Medigap plans differentiates themselves from other Medigap carriers is through their premium rating method . Most carriers determine their rates based on the attained-age rating method -LRB- your age at the time you apply with rates increasing as you get older each year -RRB- . AARP Medigap plans -LRB- insured through United Healthcare -RRB- are based on the community-rated method -LRB- everyone in an area pays the same rates regardless of their age - meaning an 85 year old is paying the same thing as a 75 year old -RRB- . Please note , the carrier also offers value-added services such as discounts for certain things such as eye exams and also offer a 24/7 nurse hotline , and silversneakers membership . You must be an AARP member to buy an AARP Medigap plan - membership can be attained during the application process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and comparison and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In Georgia , Medicare supplement plans from AARP are generally lower than Blue Cross but higher than Mutual of Omaha and several other carriers . This is especially true if you purchase your AARP Medigap plan at age 66 or later . When given a choice in plan F vs plan G , most consumers will buy plan G , but they wo n't buy it from AARP . AARP does not offer plan G .
AARP Medicare Supplement Plans are insured by United Healthcare . United Healthcare pays a royalty fee to AARP to have them sponsor their Medicare Supplement plans and that is why you must be a member of AARP in order to apply for one of their Supplements . AARP sponsors the plan they are not providing the insurance coverage or paying the claims . After the Medicare Supplement has been issued and in benefit you do do have to renew your AARP membership if you choose not to in order to keep your Supplement .
Yes . AARP offers at least two different types of life insurance . One type they have is a term life insurance policy that they sell to people age 50 or older . The rates increase every 5-years on that one . When you have a birthday that ends with a 0 or a 5 you will have a rate increase . -LRB- age 55 , 60 , 65 , etc. -RRB- if you live to your 80th birthday your AARP term policy terminates . You can then buy their other policy but the rates are much higher and are still not guaranteed against future increases . Another type policy AARP has sold for many years . It is a universal life policy where the rates are not scheduled to increase but it still has no guarantee against rate increases . They have sold this for many years . More recently they have introduced a whole life policy that does offer a guarantee against rate increases . It may not be available in all states yet . AARP is not actually an insurance company . They just market the policies for New York Life .
AARP is not an insurance company . However The Hartford which is an excellent company will offer homeowners insurance and give a discount to AARP members . I myself am an AARP member and have my home and auto through the Hartford . Discounts may vary by state but the coverage 's are excellent
Keep in mind AARP is not an insurance company . New Your Life pays for the endorsement and the right to market under the AARP banner . Just because a policy is offered under the AARP name does not `` necessarily '' guarantee a better rate than you can get elsewhere . AARP is a good organization and New York Life is a good company , all I am saying is shop and know what you are buying . Whenever you buy something over the TV or in the mail you risk getting hurt because it is very easy to be confused by some of the advertising that is done . Having a good local agent is almost always the best choice .
No , AARP is a marketing organization aimed at seniors and only endorses health insurnance but does not offer health insurance coverage . In my area AARP endorses United Health One which not always has the lowest premium . One might ask why AARP endorses a certain product . It is because the company pays for that endorsement as they pay for advertising or any other marketing method . The consumer must always shop the carriers and the plans to get what best fits him or her . AARP will always mislead the consumer to believe that the product or servce is absolutely the best in price and value which may not be true . Do n't believe it all . Shop !!
AARP no longer provides long-term care insurance . Genworth withdrew its `` affinity marketing agreement '' to accept applications for a special plan of LTCi designed for the AARP members , effective June 1 of this year . Genworth will continue serving policyowners that have previously purchased the Genworth AARP contract and will , of course , pay all legitimate claims . AARP reported that they are not looking for a new carrier to take Genworth 's place at this time , but would be acceptable to negotiating with any LTCi carrier that might come forward with a proposal . The largest and perhaps most vocal advocate for those over 50 in the US , and a major source of educational material on health-related issues for seniors , AARP said that they will continue to provide information about long-term care planning and the roll long-term care insurance might play in such planning .
The AARP branded life insurance is actually New York Life . They just pay for the AARP branding . They go all the way to guaranteed issue so the only three questions on that are going to be 1 . What is your age ? 2 . What is your gender ? 3 . How much coverage do you want ? Anyone considering this policy would be well advised to keep looking . It 's probably the worst deal you can get . Most people can get a much lower premium and first day full coverage rather than accept the terms of a guaranteed issue policy . AARP often tries to sneak into the fine print `` Premiums are not guaranteed . You can not be singled out for a rate increase but we can increase them on all insureds . '' That is completely unacceptable . New York Life is wise to pay AARP to use their name to sell this . No one who reads it would ever accept that deal . But some AARP members trust the brand name so much they do n't read it .
Bob has good information but I will add that in many states the United Healthcare Plan -LRB- AARP -RRB- has a built in rate increase the first 10-years . This is in addition to the attained age rate increase that is already built in . The way they do that is they call it a `` discount . '' The discount is for age 65 applicants but even with the full discount the premium is not cheaper than other companies . But then they take a pro-rated amount of the discount away each year for 10-years . So in reality , it was n't really a discount but a built-in additional price increase that they never have to claim as a price increase . Regardless of what you think of the AARP organization , when it comes to their name on ANY insurance product , use the same caution that you would with any other company . The insurance companies just buy the use of the AARP name and logo . It does n't mean the product is a good value or a bad one . But it does catch some seniors off guard .
AARP is not an insurer . They are an organization that sells their name and logo to insurance companies . I do not believe that any insurance company that offers group health through employers does it using the AARP logo . With the health care reform it is less likely that any company would add that logo because they all have to operate on tighter margins . Paying for the AARP logo adds cost to the product and adds no benefit . If you are searching for group health insurance for your employees , you should call a health insurance broker and let him quote you several brands of insurance .
The insurance products that are marketed with the AARP logo on them are not the same in all states . United Healthcare sells the AARP branded Medicare Supplement in most if not all states . The only sell the AARP branded Medicare Supplement in certain states . For health insurance for those not on Medicare , I believe a limited number of states are now selling an AARP health plan for ages 50 to 64 . It 's better to research all the health insurance plans available in your state than to seek out any certain brand .
AARP is a marketing organization aimed at `` seniors '' aged 50 and older . AARP has endorsed health insurance plans , including major medical for those under age 65 . In some areas the endorsed plan is underwritten by Aetna in 2013 . Compared to the Aetna plans available in the open market , you have only a few choices . AARP plans are essentially identical to those you can purchase from an insurance agent . Premium savings on the AARP plans are illusory . In order to create a lower premium some benefits are stripped from the plan vs those available in market Aetna plans . Any time you are shopping for insurance you should compare rates and benefits across a wide spectrum and not just assume plans endorsed by a marketing association or retailer are lower priced and better values .
The only way to tell if something is a Medigap plan is if it has a letter . For example , Plan F or Plan G. AARP is the brand name for the Medicare products through United Healthcare . However , they offer Medigap plans and Medicare Advantage plans so it 's important to understand what you are getting . There are big differences between the two . AARP & United Healthcare have great name recognition in the Medigap Plan & Medicare markets . United Healthcare is an `` A '' rated insurance company . However , the premiums could be higher in certain areas for exactly the same plan . It 's important to work with an independent agent who can show you AARP Medigap Plans as well as all the other `` A '' rated carriers in your area . We work with folks to determine which is the best carrier for them . We offer AARP and a lot of the other top `` A '' rated carriers . We never charge a fee for our service .
AARP auto insurance is a program written through The Hartford . Only the Hartford can offer the AARP discount to both home and auto insurance . I personally have the Hartford AARP , not just because the rates are competitive but because the coverage 's offered by the Hartford are excellent and are among the best and broadest in the industry .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Auto Insurance Cover Road Hazards ?
That depends how you are defining road hazards . If you are referring to objects in the road , you are covered if you run over them or if they kick up from the road and hit your vehicle . Collision claims typically have a higher deductible than a comprehensive claim . Glass breakage is often covered with no out of pocket cost .
Typically your auto insurance would not cover common road hazards , such as a nail in your tire without having an endorsement on your policy for mechanical breakdown or similar coverage . If you have full coverage on your vehicle then other than collision -LRB- comprehensive -RRB- coverage may provide some coverage less the policy deductible in the event of a rock hitting your windshield or such . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
That depends how you are defining road hazards . If you are referring to objects in the road , you are covered if you run over them or if they kick up from the road and hit your vehicle . Collision claims typically have a higher deductible than a comprehensive claim . Glass breakage is often covered with no out of pocket cost .
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
Typically your auto insurance would not cover common road hazards , such as a nail in your tire without having an endorsement on your policy for mechanical breakdown or similar coverage . If you have full coverage on your vehicle then other than collision -LRB- comprehensive -RRB- coverage may provide some coverage less the policy deductible in the event of a rock hitting your windshield or such . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
If you have full coverage which includes Comprehensive or Other than Collision then the answer would be yes . Comp or OTC covers any damage not related to a collision . This includes hail , fire , animal hits , glass breakage , vandalism , or other perils not related to normal wear and tear or road hazard such as pot holes . If you have a specific question on whether or not something is covered always call your agent first before calling your company . He can advise you whether or not it would be to your advantage to report a claim .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
If you have a small house in a low hazard area the premium is low . If you have a small house in a high hazard area the premium is high . If you have a mid size home in a low hazard area the premium is moderate . If you have a mid size home in a high hazard area the premium is higher then the small house . If you have a large house in a low hazard area the premium is high . If you have a large house in a high hazard area I hope you have a good income . Without details there is no way to guess at a rate for any home in any given area .
As long as you have coverage in your auto policy for physical damage to your car -LRB- Comprehensive and Collision -RRB- and Liability , should anything happen that is a covered loss whether on a public access road or highway or `` off road '' as you suggest , then your personal auto policy will provide protection . All of the terms and conditions in the policy would apply including a deductible for damage settlement to your car so it is important to talk to your Insurance Professional about these in order to maintain a solid understanding of the protection that your policy provides to you and your family .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
A key issue here will be if it is licensed for road use or if it constitutes a use in service to the premises but is designed for off road use . Typically any vehicle intended and licensed for road use is excluded on a renters or homeowners policy . The is some gray area around vehicles including scooters designed for off road use . Talk to your agent about the type of scooter you have and what you expect to use it for .
Your car is covered by your auto insurance , not a renters policy . There is an obscure situation where there could be coverage but it would not be for a car used on the road . If your car was used to maintain the premises and was not used on the road it might be covered for vandalism .
Homeowners is the most common form of hazard insurance . Hazard insurance covers property damage caused by fire , wind , storms , and other similar risks . Sometimes earthquakes and floods are also covered , however usually they are not . The term hazard insurance appears often in communications with a title insurance company .
Homeowners Insurance will not pay for dead tree removal . A tree is a plant and it is the homeowners obligation to show pride of ownership and to take care of his or her yard . Big plant or small it 's the homeowners responsibility to maintain . Also a dead tree just sitting there and has not caused any damage to the dwelling , therefore there is no claim . I know what your thinking . The tree is a potential hazard and could fall on the house and cause damage or hurt someone . If this were to happen and you were unaware of any potential hazard there would be coverage should the tree fall on your house . However , if you are aware the tree is a hazard and fail to mitigate the hazard you are negligent and are not living up to your obligation as a homeowners and risk having the claim denied .
There are a couple of reasons behind compelling us to have auto insurance . The first is legal . In most states these days , Connecticut included , one must have auto insurance in order to register a car and operate that car on public roads and highways . That is a pretty compelling reason in and of itself . Further , though , if you purchase a new car and have an auto loan or if you lease your car , the finance companies will also require that you have and maintain auto insurance as a condition of the loan or lease .
The basic definition of Homeowners Insurance is a hazard insurance or fire insurance policy provided for the primary residence of the titled owner of a property . Banks and mortgage companies simply name all policies ` Hazard Insurance ' as the building -LRB- dwelling -RRB- is the hazard ; many others simply refer to all policies as ` Fire Insurance ' as one of the basic perils covered is ` Fire ' . The correct terminology of the house insurance for the home you own and primarily reside in is called Homeowners Insurance . The Department of Insurance in all States refer to the Policy Form as a Homeowners Form , the basic policy form details are provided by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Mortgage companies and banks sometimes refer to Homeowners ' Insurance as `` Hazard '' insurance . Homeowners ' Insurance provides coverage in the event there is a loss caused by a `` hazard '' and thus the reference . Homeowners ' policies can covere a wide range of these hazards or perils , or can specifically limit the coverage in some cases .
The mortgage company will require `` Hazard Insurance '' as part of your mortgage contract . In my experience they are looking for a homeowners insurance policy that will cover the replacement of the home . In the contract it usually states that if you fail to maintain hazard insurance they may purchase it on your behalf . So to answer the question is Hazard & Homeowners insurance the same . . the answer is yes-if you 're speaking about the mortgage requirements .
When used in the context of a discussion of Home Insurance , yes it is . `` Hazard Insurance '' is a common term used to refer to Homeowners ' Insurance becauseit speaks to the broad `` hazards '' that such a policy insures against . Hazards such as wind , fire , lightning , wind driven rain , smoke , etc are common . Be sure to talk with your insurance professional to understand all of the coverage , limitations and options that your policy provides .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is A Gym Membership Covered By Medicare ?
Unfortunately , gym memberships are not covered by Medicare because they are not considered a medically necessary expense . However , there are some Medicare Advantage plans that can have some wellness programs and gym privileges covered . You would need to review each plan to find out if it provides that type of benefit in your area .
Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- does not cover YMCA or gym membership . Some Medicare Supplements and Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- does provide gym memberships to their clients . SIlversneakers is a popular program offered by companies that sell Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplement Plans . When selecting a plan evaluate the premium you are paying with the benefits the plan provides , do not base your decision on whether they offer a gym membership . Premiums vary considerably between companies that offer these plans . You may save more than enough to buy a gym membership by purchasing a plan that does not offer one because the premium cost much less .
No . Medicare does not pay for YMCA or any other gym membership . However , SOME Medicare health insurance plans DO offer gym memberships as an extra perk . It is common with many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Medicare Part C -RRB- and some people who have original Medicare have a Silver Sneakers gym membership included in the price of their Medicare supplement .
Generally , the answer would be no . Aetna -LRB- or any other major medical carrier -RRB- does not cover gym memberships . There may be plans available that have add-on -LRB- non-insurance -RRB- benefits such as travel discounts or gym memberships , but a true major medical health insurance plan will usually not pay for routine gym memberships . In some instances a carrier may agree to pay for a gym membership if the individual needs a type of physical therapy -LRB- such as swimming -RRB- that is more economical than traditional therapy sessions .
Original Medicare does not cover gym memberships . Medicare Advantage Plans and some Medicare Supplements do ! This is one of the value added features of many Medicare Advantage Plans . If you want to be able to have a gym membership paid for look at the Medicare Advantage Plans in your ares .
Most likely , and technically , no it does not . In most allcases it is usually a Wellness Program that pays for a gym membership , and even then it is usually a reimbursement payment . But , there are some instances where an employer defined contribution plan or self-insured plan will pay for a gym membership or has a membership built into the benefits package .
If you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage Plan it will be much easier to find a plan that pays for Gym membership . Depending on the area you live in , Most Medicare Advantage Plans offers this benefit . I am not aware of an under 65 health plan that offers Gym membership although some may offer discounts .
I do not know any carrier that will in CA that will cover a gym membership . There are some carriers such as United HealthCare that will reimburse an insured for part of a gym membership based on how many times they attend . My suggestion is to check the carrier website to see if they have any discounts or reimbursements under wellness .
Unfortunately , gym memberships are not covered by Medicare because they are not considered a medically necessary expense . However , there are some Medicare Advantage plans that can have some wellness programs and gym privileges covered . You would need to review each plan to find out if it provides that type of benefit in your area .
Medicare does not cover any type of gym membership , YMCA or otherwise . There are however some Medicare Advantage Plans that offer `` Silver Sneaker '' . Silver Sneakers will pay for your membership in the Y or some other facilities , depending on your area . The AARP United Healthcare Medicare Supplement also offers Silver Sneakers in some area 's .
There are specific health insurance policies -LRB- often HMOs -RRB- that will partially reimburse you for gym memberships . They will also reimburse you for portions of your YMCA or JCC memberships along with other fitness classes . It 's best to check with the individual carrier for specific details or your broker that may be aware of the company 's policy .
Medigap policies serve as a supplement to Original Medicare . Original medicare is an 80/20 plan , where Medicare pays 80 % of the approved charges . The beneficiary is typically responsible for the 20 % co-insurance as well as co-pays and deductibles that come with Medicare Parts A & B . The Medigap policy is designed to pick up the 20 % Medicare does n't cover in exchange for a monthly premium payable to the carrier selected . The most comprehensive Medigap policy is Plan F , which covers all of the Part A & B deductible , co-insurance and co-pays , so when the beneficiary goes to receive care their is zero out-of-pocket costs . Some plans may also provide benefits like foreign travel as well as a gym membership as part of your regular plan . Please note : when purchasing a Medigap Policy , you need to add a Stand-Alone Prescription Drug Plan to satisfy your requirement as a Medicare Beneficiary to have Part D - Prescription Drug Coverage met .
An individual health insurance plan is generally not going to pay for your gym membership . However , they may offer certain wellness programs for you to be active and continue your good health . Some plans may offer a discount on memberships of facilities the carrier has an association/contract with . You will need to review your specific plan or contact your agent/the carrier to find out what programs , if any , are available . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare does not cover exercise equipment , however if you have medicare part a and part b you could possibly get a medicare advantage plan which they provide a free gym membership . There are many benefits you could receive and i believe the best thing to do is speak to a medicare specialist .
Depending on where you live , the network in your area , and your personal situation Medicare Advantage Plans can be an attractive option . Unlike Original Medicare , Medicare Advantage Plans have a maximum out of pocket that you would pay for healthcare potentially saving you 10 's of thousands of dollars if you have a serious health issue . Most plans have the prescription drug plan included saving you money on premiums . Many also offer extra benefits such as gym membership , dental , and vision . Many Medicare Advantage plans have $ 0 to very low premiums making them a very attractive option for those on a budget .
There may be some plans that offer discounts on weight loss programs or gym memberships but generally your health will not cover a weight loss program you purchase over the counter . Every health insurance plan is different however and may offer at least some type of coverage depending on the weight loss program , is it medically necessary and prescribed by the doctor . Check with your agent to see what your policy covers .
Each health plan spells out what they cover and what they exclude . Even if your health plan does not explicitly cover a gym or health club membership , they may provide `` wellness benefits '' which could pay a portion of the cost . You could also check with some of the facilities in your area and ask them if they are part of a network that might provide a discount .
Depending on what you consider a `` program '' ... Maybe . It will cover your doctors visit where the Dr. can run a risk assesment and go over a program to help address one 's individual body issues . If you were wondering if health insurance would cover a gym membership and a physical trainer then no , although both employers and insurance companies are increasingly offering those services at discounted prices for their employees/policy holders -LRB- increasing the focus and development of preventive , proacitve ways to eliminate serious health issues before they develop or worsen -RRB- .
I 've had my hands on well over 10K individual health insurance plans in the past ten years and I 've never seen one that will pay for a personal trainer . I have seen group plans that will subsidize or discount gym memberships though . Using a trainer to get fit is an excellent idea , but you 'll probably end up paying for it out of your own pocket . Have fun working out .
Many plans -LRB- but not every single one -RRB- provide some type of incentive for members to actively exercise . Wellness programs are becoming more prevalent as plans seek to keep claims experience lower by promoting healthy lifestyles . There may be some form of direct compensation to offset a portion of your annual membership costs . There may also be benefits tied to the number of times the facility is used over the course of the plan year . Many gym utilize swipe cards for entry that facilitate usage reporting .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Is The Best Long Term Care Insurance In Arizona ?
The best long term care insurance in Arizona can come from any of the highly rated companies that offer long term care insurance in this state . It just depends on which company has the best rate and features for your age and health . With all the wonderful levels of care offered in AZ , you would definitely want to get a policy that offers the option to use the benefit to pay for any type of care .
There are several long term care insurance companies who do business in Arizona . Selecting one carrier is a difficult task because each potential purchaser has differing personal information like gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Those items can effect the selection of the company . But overall Genworth is a leading long term care insurance provider .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
The best long term care insurance in Arizona can come from any of the highly rated companies that offer long term care insurance in this state . It just depends on which company has the best rate and features for your age and health . With all the wonderful levels of care offered in AZ , you would definitely want to get a policy that offers the option to use the benefit to pay for any type of care .
If 5 different people got disability insurance in Arizona , chances are they would end up with 5 different companies . There are some plans that are best for physicians , some are best for laborers , some for self employed persons . This is in addition to the difference in price for persons of different ages and health , and looking for different features in the policy . To find the best disability insurance premium in Arizona for you , it is best to talk to a broker who really knows his/her stuff . You will end up with the right plan and may save money over going with what you thought was the best company in the state .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Great Question . Insurance is the Law in Arizona you must have at least liability insurance to operate a car and also to get your car plates in Arizona . The cost is not very expensive for liability insurance in Arizona ranges are $ 40 - $ 60 a month for that type of coverages .
To get a resident life insurance license in Arizona , you need to take the licensing test and then pass the stringent test . Some prospective agents attend classes , seminars or webinars to assist them in learning the material . Once the test is passed , you submit evidence of that to the Arizona Department of Insurance and pay the fees needed to be licensed as a life insurance agent in the state of Arizona .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
There are several long term care insurance companies who do business in Arizona . Selecting one carrier is a difficult task because each potential purchaser has differing personal information like gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Those items can effect the selection of the company . But overall Genworth is a leading long term care insurance provider .
Long term care insurance policies differ from company to company and sometimes by state because the price for assisted living and nursing home confinement costs differ . In Arizona my long term care insurance policy pays 7,000 a month for a total benefit of $ 420,000 or 60 months of coverage .
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance but has recently suspended Long Term Care sales in California , Arizona , Connecticut , Hawaii , Indiana , Nevada and New York . There has not been a formal announcement as to whether they plan to reintroduce products in those states in the future .
To see how much life insurance costs in Arizona , you can go to a website that offers life insurance in Arizona , and that also offers instant life insurance quotes . You will see how much the rate is for someone with your gender , age , build and health conditions -LRB- if the quote engine gives you those variables -RRB- , and be able to input different face amounts and term lengths to see how they vary .
The Arizona Department of Insurance regulates life insurance in Arizona . They do not do so on a policy by policy basis , but by establishing and enforcing policy provisions such as grace periods , free look periods , exam requirements , and death benefit processing . The Director of Insurance for the AZ Dept of Insurance at this time is Germaine Marks .
Renters insurance can vary in price base on many different factors . In Arizona a typical $ 20,000 in personal property , $ 100,000 in liability policy costs around $ 13/month . If you 're in Arizona you can call my office for a free quote -LRB- 480-985-6141 -RRB- , otherwise contact your local Allstate agent and they can run together a quote very quickly for you .
Great question . Cobra cost a lot in Arizona . If you have been laid of your work and in good health than cobra is the most expensive option for you . You can apply on your own and get individual insurance for much less money than cobra in Arizona . Please call your local agent for detail .
Life insurance proceeds in Arizona are not taxable if left to a beneficiary other than the estate . If the estate is the beneficiary , or if the named beneficiaries on the policy are no longer alive , income tax will apply . Federal estate taxes are charged if the life insurance proceeds plus the value of the estate exceed the exempted amount of $ 5,250,000 in 2013 . Only the excess amount is taxed . Arizona does not have a state estate or inheritance tax .
Arizona does not . No-fault auto insurance has the insurance company pay for your damages no matter who 's at fault . In Arizona , we have uninsured and underinsured -LRB- UM/UIM -RRB- insurance for damages other people cause to you if they do n't have insurance or have enough . With state law , you have to sign whether or not you want UM/UIM coverage . Things UM/UIM may cover : A driver hitting you who does n't have insurance A driver hitting you who has insufficient coverage for your hospital bills A hit and run driver A driver who hits you while you 're walking or cycling Your medical bills when you 're a passenger in someone else 's vehicle and they have an accident -LRB- when the other driver 's insurance or theirs is insufficient -RRB- . UM/UIM is an excellent option for people looking for no-fault insurance . In fact , at our agency , we recommend UM/UIM to every one of our policyholders . If you have any questions , do n't hesitate to reach out to us at www.insuranceeddie.com .
Medicare is a national health insurance program . This means that the coverage you have in Arizona is exactly the same coverage you would have in any other state . You can use your medicare all over the country exactly as you could here as long as the doctor accepts medicare . Medicare Part A Covers inpatient hospital care , skilled nursing facility care , hospice and some home healthcare . Medicare Part B Covers , ambulatory services , durable medical equipment , mental healthcare , outpatient medical treatment , and limited outpatient medications .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Blepharoplasty Covered By Medicare ?
Blepharoplasty is a type of reconstructive -LRB- plastic -RRB- surgery used as a treatment for drooping eyelids . These `` eyelid lifts '' could be a covered item as long as the surgery is not simply for cosmetic reasons . Your doctor needs to justify the need by measuring the `` droop '' and a visual test must be conducted to prove your vision is impaired .
Medicare and other health insurance policies will cover blepharoplasty surgery if there is a medical need for corrective surgery . Blepharoplasty is sometimes done for cosmetic reasons . In those cases , surgery would not be covered by Medicare . Your opthalmologist will measure the degree of eyelid droop and can advise you if surgery would be covered by Medicare or not .
Blepharoplasty is a type of reconstructive -LRB- plastic -RRB- surgery used as a treatment for drooping eyelids . These `` eyelid lifts '' could be a covered item as long as the surgery is not simply for cosmetic reasons . Your doctor needs to justify the need by measuring the `` droop '' and a visual test must be conducted to prove your vision is impaired .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Medicare can cover INR testing once a month when certain conditions are met . Typically you 'll need to consult with your doctor and have them determine if it is medically necessary and confirm with Medicare that the treatment course will be covered -LRB- would fall under Part B - your physician insurance for outpatient procedures -RRB- . Here 's a link to a publication from CMS -LRB- the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- that provides a detailed explanation regarding INR testing , what specific conditions must be met to have it covered , and how Medicare covers it : WEBSITELINK Please note , under Medicare Part B , only 80 % of the expense would be covered by Medicare . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan , it may cover some or all of the other 20 % -LRB- depending on the plan letter you have -RRB- of the service expenses . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement , please feel free to contact me to see about qualifying for one . Medicare Supplement plans are standardized , meaning the benefits are exactly the same regardless of which insurance carrier you have the coverage through -LRB- only the price is different ! -RRB- Even if you already have a Medicare Supplement plan , I can take a quick look to see if a lower monthly premium is available -LRB- takes less than 5 minutes and I may be able to save you a ton of money on your monthly premium -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is very comprehensive health coverage for those that qualify . Medicare will cover a Total Knee Replacement as long as the Physician , Hospital , and any other healthcare providers are deemed as providers . You can check each provider out on the Medicare.gov website . Medicare Part A would cover the hospital expenses and if a Skilled Nursing Facility is needed for rehabilitation . You will have a deductible if you only have Medicare A and B . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of the out of pocket costs . Medicare Part B would cover the Physician charges and any outpatient services required . You have an annual deductible and 20 % coinsurance . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of these our to pocket cost . Medicare Advantage plans have daily charges and copays that vary for every plan . You should check with the plan to confirm that the providers are in their network and determine what your costs might be .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Alzheimer 's ?
Most of the medical care related to Alzheimer 's disease is covered by Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- or Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital insurance -RRB- . If you have Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , your policy may help cover the co-insurance and deductibles associated with Original Medicare Part A and B . You can contact your insurance company or an insurance agent who specializes in Medicare Supplements to review your Medigap benefits . As for medications , a Part D prescription plan will cover most Alzheimers medications . Your costs -LRB- co-pays and deductibles -RRB- will depend on your plan . Unfortunately , long-term custodial care costs -LRB- nursing home , assisted living , or adult day care -RRB- are not covered by Medicare . Even hiring home help for bathing , toileting and dressing -LRB- custodial care -RRB- is not covered by Medicare unless the Medicare Beneficiary is receiving skilled-nursing care , physical or occupational therapy to assist with the recovery from an illness or injury . If I can be of further assistance , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Medicare does not cover skilled care in a nursing home over a certain number of days . Considering that Alzheimer 's can be debilitating , yet progress slowly , it is common for persons with Alzheimer 's Disease to live for years in a skilled care facility with just minimal assistance from Medicare . Purchasing Long Term Care Insurance can provide the funds needed to hire help at home or pay for housing in a facility designed for persons with Alzheimer 's .
Most of the medical care related to Alzheimer 's disease is covered by Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- or Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital insurance -RRB- . If you have Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , your policy may help cover the co-insurance and deductibles associated with Original Medicare Part A and B . You can contact your insurance company or an insurance agent who specializes in Medicare Supplements to review your Medigap benefits . As for medications , a Part D prescription plan will cover most Alzheimers medications . Your costs -LRB- co-pays and deductibles -RRB- will depend on your plan . Unfortunately , long-term custodial care costs -LRB- nursing home , assisted living , or adult day care -RRB- are not covered by Medicare . Even hiring home help for bathing , toileting and dressing -LRB- custodial care -RRB- is not covered by Medicare unless the Medicare Beneficiary is receiving skilled-nursing care , physical or occupational therapy to assist with the recovery from an illness or injury . If I can be of further assistance , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Medicare will cover some aspects of Alzheimer 's care . It depends on many situations . Diagnosis and doctor treatment should be a covered expense under Medicare . Prescription drugs designed to treat Alzheimer 's may be covered under your Medicare Part D . In patient care in a hospital or SNF may also be a covered expense as well as rehab and hospice . Your doctor is in a position to advise you on these items .
Medicare will pay for medical expenses for someone having Alzheimer 's , like it pays for medical expenses for persons not having Alzheimer 's . If the person with Alzheimer 's Disease needs to live in a facility due to being unable to care for themselves , and if they have been hospitalized for at least 3 days shortly before going to that facility , Medicare can help pay for up to 100 days in that facility . After that , private funds , Long Term Care Insurance benefits , or Medicaid must be used to pay for residential care .
I would believe that if a person were to become medically disabled due to the medical diagnosis of Alzheimer 's Disease , that yes the claim would be paid . The challenge will be most disability policies end around age 65 years old and some extend to 67 years old . The average age of Alzheimer 's Disease progressing to a disability is much older .
Critical Illness Insurance covers serious illnesses that have the potential to be life threatening . The main ones are heart attack , stroke , and cancer . If cancer is in very early stages , the policy might not cover it , or may cover it with a reduced benefit . Other illness that may or may not be covered by an individual plan are coronary bypass surgery , major organ transplant , Alzheimer 's Disease , blindness , deafness , Parkinson 's , Multiple Sclerosis , paralysis , and kidney failure .
The critical illness definitions for this type of insurance vary from policy to policy . Nearly all cover serious cancer , heart attack and stroke . Some cover Alzheimer 's , blindness , deafness , MS , Parkinson 's , brain tumors , and organ transplants . In order to see what the definition of critical insurance is for each policy , review the contract carefully .
Critical Illness Insurance covers three basic conditions : heart attack , stroke , and some types of cancer . Depending on the features of the policy , critical illness insurance can also cover heart transplant , coronary bypass surgery , angioplasty , kidney failure , major organ transplant , paralysis , Alzheimer 's disease , deafness , blindness , MS , HIV/AID contracted through a medical procedure , Parkinson 's disease , or a terminal illness .
Yes , Long Term Care Insurance does cover Alzheimers in most situations . If someone has Alzheimers Disease while applying for Long Term Care Insurance , they will be denied . But if the Alzheimers develops after the policy was purchased , cognitive impairment is one of the triggers for Long Term Care to begin the countdown to making payments .
The basic conditions that are covered by most critical illness insurance policies are stroke , heart attack and cancer . Each policy has different features , so you need to review each policy to see what it will cover . Some possibilities are MS , Parkinson 's , heart bypass , organ transplant , deafness , blindness and Alzheimer 's . Mild cases often do not qualify for payment , as the purpose is to compensate those who are facing a life threatening illness .
What is covered with critical illness insurance is spelled out in each policy , and differs from company to company . The basic critical illnesses are stroke , heart attack and some types of cancer . The cancer is usually the more serious kind , although some policies will pay a partial benefit for milder types of cancer . Some other critical illnesses that may be covered are organ transplant , Parkinson 's , Alzheimer 's , kidney failure , coronary bypass , blindness , deafness , or paralysis .
Long-term care insurance benefits do not cover acute medical problems , but rather addresses chronic medical situations . Acute medical problems would include such things as a broken arm or abdominal surgery . Major medical , Medicare , and Medicaid would be sources of insurance coverage for those events . Chronic medical problems involve conditionsfrom whicha person is not likely to ever recover . Such conditions might include multiple sclerosis , Alzheimer 's disease , osteoporosis , or auto-immune diseases . Just having a chronic disease or condition does not necessarily trigger the payment of benefits from a long-term care policy , however . One must be medically certified by a health care professional that there is an inability to perform at least two of six specified daily activities -LRB- such as getting dressed , feeding oneself , etc. -RRB- , or having been diagnosed with a cognitive impairment . Long-term care insurance will not pay for medical costs of a chronic condition if a person can successfully get around and take care of themselves .
Aricept is often prescribed to treat symptoms of senile dementia or Alzheimers . When covered , the drug would be part of your Medicare Part D plan . There are generic equivalents , such as Donezepil which is $ 10 for a 30 day supple vs over $ 400 for Aricept . Some drug plans will not cover brand name drugs when a generic equivalent exists .
Stroke , heart attack and certain types and stages of cancer are standard conditions covered by critical illness insurance . Individual policies will specify the conditions that they cover , and can include : major organ transplants , loss of hearing or sight or speech , coronary artery angioplasty or bypass , paralysis , persistent vegetative state , Parkinson 's , Alzheimers , kidney failure , MS , CF , MD , severe burns or some other health conditions . Some policies will also pay a partial benefit for less serious health conditions .
That is an excellent question ! I read a study recently that cited the statistic that 70 % of senior Citizens will require some form of long term care after retirement . I recommend that you look at your retirement fund . Do you have enough to cover if one or both of you need to be placed in an assisted care facility ? Budget between $ 6-8 ,000 per month for each of you . If you can cover comfortable living for yourselves , and cover those costs if need be , then you probably do n't . If it may be an issue , then perhaps it is a wise decision to look into a policy . It is a tragedy when I speak with folks whose retirement nest egg was gobbled up by an illness like Alzheimer 's , or the care needed after a stroke . Please contact me if you would like to discuss this further , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Halifax Critical Illness Covers the following Conditions -LRB- please consult them directly to confirm the listed conditions are still covered -RRB- : Alzheimers Aorta graft surgery Aplastic anaemia Bacterial meningitis Benign brain tumor Blindness Cancer Coma Coronary artery by-pass surgery Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Deafness Heart Attack Heart Valve replacement or repair HIV/AIDS as a result of physical assault or accident HIV/AIDS from blood transfusion Kidney failure Loss of limbs Loss of speech Major organ transplant Motor neurone disease MS Parkinson 's Stroke Third degree burns Total permanent disability
Critical insurance policies each have their own set of criteria , so you must review the policy features to know what illnesses your critical illness insurance policy will cover . Some that can be included are : 1 -RRB- Cancer -LRB- it may require a certain stage to be covered -RRB- 2 -RRB- Stroke 3 -RRB- Heart Attack 4 -RRB- Coronary Bypass 5 -RRB- Deafness 6 -RRB- Blindness 7 -RRB- Multiple Sclerosis 8 -RRB- Organ Transplant 9 -RRB- Kidney Failure 10 -RRB- Heart Valve Replacement 11 -RRB- Alzheimer 's Disease 12 -RRB- Paralysis
Yes , you can be declined for a medical condition and/or adverse health history as it pertains to `` morbidity '' . Morbidity involves a reduced ability to perform mental or physical activities . Such ailments as arthritis , cognitive impairment , Alzheimer 's disease , advanced osteoporosis , lung malfunction , and blindness are all classified under morbidity . If one uses tobacco and has any morbidity issue , that usually results in a decline as well , but smoking by itself does not often result in a decline.Underwriting for long-term care insurance is getting tighter . Genworth , for instance , will soon be requiring some medical work for applicants , which may include lab tests -LRB- urine sample and blood draw -RRB- . Carriers are also moving toward gender-based premiums , with male applicant costs being lower than female applicant costs due to the fact that more women go on claim than men . This is also true for most insurance , so it 's not a new concept . Life insurance costs are higher for men than women because women live longer . Disability Insurance has had gender-based rates for quite a while . Only Montana has mandatory uni-sex rates for all insurance.Before submitting a formal application for long-term care , an applicant should be pre-screened by completing a medical questionnaire provided either by the carrier or the representing agent . Applicants should answer all answers truthfully and completely to determine medical eligibility . It is better to be told not to submit an application due to confidential prescreening than have a formal application declined .
To get Life Insurance for the elderly , you must first determine if the person to be insured meets the health guidelines . There are a number of small , No Exam policies that cover individuals up to age 80 or 85 , that make allowances for many of the health conditions that can plague the elderly . However , if there have been recent hospitalizations , if health conditions are very poorly controlled , or if there is need of assistance to do any ADL 's , the policy will be graded or could be declined.If cognitive abilities are reduced due to dementia or Alzheimer 's , the only option will be guaranteed issue coverage , and most of those policies are not offered past age 80 . By shopping with an agency that specializes in life insurance for seniors , you can obtain the best rate and find one that will work for the health factors of the elderly person in mind .
end question
start question
annuities
What Are The Disadvantage Of Annuities ?
The main disadvantage of Annuities is that your money is not 100 % liquid until your term is over . Some annuities have more liquidity than others ; most offer 10 % yearly penalty free liquidity . Some offer up to 20 % yearly liquidity , while some just offer 5 % . Most deferred annuities allow complete liquidity in the event of a terminal illness or a Long Term Care need . This is why it is important to work with an experienced independent agent who can evaluate your needs and help you find the right product for your situation . Another commonly cited disadvantage are `` high fees '' . But in fact , only Variable Annuities automatically include fees . But the fees do tend to be high in most peoples opinion . It is important to remember that a `` disadvantage '' all depends on perspective and what your needs are .
The main disadvantage of Annuities is that your money is not 100 % liquid until your term is over . Some annuities have more liquidity than others ; most offer 10 % yearly penalty free liquidity . Some offer up to 20 % yearly liquidity , while some just offer 5 % . Most deferred annuities allow complete liquidity in the event of a terminal illness or a Long Term Care need . This is why it is important to work with an experienced independent agent who can evaluate your needs and help you find the right product for your situation . Another commonly cited disadvantage are `` high fees '' . But in fact , only Variable Annuities automatically include fees . But the fees do tend to be high in most peoples opinion . It is important to remember that a `` disadvantage '' all depends on perspective and what your needs are .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Your question , `` What are the Advantages and Disadvantages of Life Insurance '' is a good starting point of inquiry . However there are several different types of life insurance and some additional options of the kinds of providers . I would say that the universal advantage that all the types of life insurance have is that they will pay a cash benefit to the beneficiaries of the policy that has a much greater value than it 's monetary cost . That is - as long as the policy is in force , and if the policy is a `` Universal '' life policy that the premiums must have been kept up with the pace of the increasing `` cost of insurance '' . And that 's what I hate about `` Universal '' life policies and would definitely count that as a DISadvantage . The greatest Advantages all around are achieved with Participating Whole Life policies with Mutual companies . The only thing that could be considered a disadvantage in these policies would be the higher premiums paid compared with Term policies . But that 's like comparing carrots to Filet Mignon . WHole life policies carry a much greater benefit -LRB- face/death value -RRB- than their cost . They also accumulate tax-free Cash Value that may be used , tax-free and even provide an income for retirement years . Participating Whole Life with Mutual companies are also eligible for Dividends in addition to the Guaranteed tax-free compounding interest paid to the cash value . And as long as the premiums are paid as agreed the policy will never expire . And the premiums will never increase . Also with these participating policies your benefit amount may increase over the life of the policy . Term and Universal policies do expire and that would be a disadvantage . With Term policies there is never a cash value , and with Universal policies there can be a cash value that grows for a number of years , but then it will usually be devoured by the increasing ` cost of insurance ' . All disadvantages . For more information see WEBSITELINK
That is a great question ! The biggest disadvantage to annuities is the lack of liquidity . For the first few years of the annuity , there are hefty surrender fees if something happens , and you need to pull some cash quickly . Most annuities will allow for a small fee free withdrawal , generally up to 10 % , but by taking even that cash , you greatly reduce the earnings potential of the annuity . Another disadvantage would arise if the rate of return on the annuity ended up being lower than what you might have received had the money been invested differently . If you 've got sufficient cash reserves and have done your homework before buying , neither of these should be an issue . Thanks for asking !
The major disadvantages of a fixed annuity are : the accumulation is set at a fixed interest rate and does not always keep pace with changes in the market . The owner of the annuity doesnt have any control over the investments that underlie the annuity . When the annuity is converted to lifetime income all control over the value of the annuity is released . These can be seen as disadvantages or advantages depending upon the need of the consumer .
The advantages of having life insurance is knowing that your financial obligations will be taken care of and not a burden on your survivor . The disadvantage of life insurance is that for the vast majority the insureds do not match their Survivor 's need for cash upon their death with the ` Right Kind ' of insurance plan . Consider for example : a married insured whose Spouse relies upon their income to sustain the expenses of daily living . What is the ` Right Kind ' of Life Insurance plan and what is the ` Right Amount ' of death benefit ? Term Insurance 's disadvantage is the fact that very few deaths occur in the coverage period . Their need for income remains unprotected . Permanent plan 's disadvantage is the fact that only the wealthy can afford the face amounts required to support a Survivor 's need for lifetime income . Reversionary Annuity by design is the ` Right Kind ' of life insurance plan when Survivor Income is the need . It is much more affordable than Permanent plans and 100 % of the Surviving spouses will receive its benefit .
You can purchase an Annuity from a few different sources . However the best way is to use an independent insurance agent who specializes in annuities . An independent agent can shop the market and all the different companies/products to give you the best annuity for your situation . You can also get annuities from captive insurance agents who work only for one company . They are limited -LRB- or highly encouraged -RRB- to just sell annuities from that one company . And since annuity rates are constantly changing and no one company has the best rates for all types of products , some consumers see this as a disadvantage . Some banks provide annuities , however their selection is often limited . Financial Advisors sometimes sell annuities as well as some stock brokers ; however , they usual stick to mainly variable annuities that are directly invested in the stock market . You can find an independent annuity expert online via a web search for them in your area . Or at various websites such as WEBSITELINK
As Lenny said , the biggest advantage of Term life insurance is it 's relatively low cost -LRB- although this is not always the case -RRB- . Another advantage is that it is a simple product , with few bells and whistles , so less complicated to buy than some permanent policies . It is a good choice for those who need life insurance for a set period of time and do n't care about cash value . The biggest disadvantage of term is that the cost will jump very high after the term ends . Another disadvantage is , if you miss two monthly payments , you will need to qualify medically to get your policy back . Some people find it a disadvantage to have to make regular payments , as you can not pay it off ahead of time , as you can with Universal or Whole Life .
What are the disadvantages to long term care ? First and foremost , price . Not necessarily the price you pay now for the policy , but the future potential cost of the policy . No one can say with any certainty what the cost of an existing policy will be in 5 to 10 years . That is the only real disadvantage to a long term care policy .
An annuity has a distinct advantage over other investments . That advantage is its ability to provide a lifetime income guaranteed . If that is the need , then an annuity is the only option . The second advantage is the income tax treatment given to an annuity . During the accumulation phase any gain on the policy regardless of its source is deferred until the annuity is surrendered or annuitized . Annuities can incorporate a wide range of investments which will allow an investor to change investment strategies with the passage of time . The biggest disadvantage to an annuity is that it is a long term program and capital is difficult to withdraw if needed in the early years of the contract .
Assuming youre addressing non-qualified annuities , the short answer is yes . Most financial planners who use annuities and estate planning attorneys need a compelling reason to place an annuity in a trust.There are three items that could be a disadvantage of holding an annuity in a trust : trust expenses , at the death of the annuitant , a grantor trust might trigger a taxable distribution event and the potential tax uncertainty of an entity holding ownership of an annuity .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
Annuities can have disadvantages based on the product profile and the client suitability . Annuities are generally purchased for future income . During the accumulation period , liquidity could be a concern based on limited withdrawals , surrender charges and could incur a penalty before age 59 . Long term guaranteed fixed interest rates , especially in a low interest rate environment , could be detrimental in a rising interest rate market where annuities could be difficult to move because of the liquidity items already mentioned . Some annuities are tied to domestic and foreign indices , with a possibility of non crediting years because of poor indices performance . Some annuities use separate sub accounts which use market equities and bond investment vehicles that have exposure to volatility , i.e. you could lose all your money in the cash value account .
Some advantages of life insurance are : 1 . Being able to leave money to provide for those who would be financially hurt by the insured person 's death , 2 . Not having to wait years to save up this amount of money , 3 . Life insurance normally being exempt from income tax , 4 . Life insurance normally being able to bypass probate , 5 . Policy owners being able to choose their own beneficiaries , 6 . Beneficiaries being able to use the death benefit as they see fit . 7 . The versatility and availability of so many different policies to choose from . The disadvantages could be : 1 . Having so much life insurance that one does not have a good quality of life , when your beneficiary really wo n't need that much . 2 . Getting Life Insurance when what the clients really want is a potentially high paying investment , and they are OK with risk . 3 . Having to qualify for Life Insurance medically can be a disadvantage for those with poor health .
What are the advantages and disadvantages of life insurance ? The advantages of owning life insurance are many as others have already noted . So I will focus on the one advantage life insurance has over any other product or investment option . Life insurance is the only product that instantly creates a pot of money upon the death of the insured . No other product can do this . Every other choice , the money has to be in your account in advance . The biggest disadvantage to owning life insurance is that it is a boring product that simply does it 's job . You will not impress your friends or others at parties when you talk about the performance of your life insurance plan.Cheers .
That is a great question ! There are two things that could be seen as disadvantages to having a fixed rate annuity . One is inherent in all annuities , and that is the fact that the money is untouchable for several years , without paying penalties to withdraw it . If you change your mind , or feel that it was n't a good investment , it can be difficult to change without taking a hit financially . Annuities are a bad investment vehicle if you have liquidity issues . The second is that if your 're not receiving a rate that will outpace inflation and cover fees , you can actually lose money . If the guaranteed rate say , is 2 % , but the fees are 1 % and inflation is 1.5 % , you are actually losing money . The same could be said if the money invested in the annuity could have brought a higher return invested elsewhere . It 's important to really have a good advisor when looking at annuities , especially fixed ones , to ensure you get the best return possible . Thank you for asking !
I believe there are way more advantages to owning life insurance than disadvantages . The only disadvantage I can think of is having to pay ongoing premiums until death . The advantages are almost too numerous to list . Here are some of the most important . Life insurance provides income protection for loved ones left behind , repays debt , educates children , gives peace of mind , protects key employees , protects business partnerships , helps with savings for retirement and is almost always tax free .
How much is life insurance for a 21 year old ? The amount of premium depends on several different factors . These factors are basically the same for any person at any age . It depends on the type of life insurance you are buying . Term insurance is generally cheaper for the term of the contract . However , once that term has expired the premiums usually increase . Whole-life insurance offers premiums that will not increase for the life of the insured as long as all premiums are kept current , as well as any other conditions of the contract . This allows for the young person to budget for the premiums over the course of the life of the insured . Whole-life insurance takes a little longer to mature . Therefore , just about the time the term insurance is about to run the course of the policy the whole-life insurance should be maturing . A good combination of these products covers the short-term needs , as well as , the long-term needs . There are also universal life policies to be considered . These products offer flexible premium amounts . Fixed annuities are considered a form of life insurance and these are beneficial for retirement . All of these products are great for the young person to consider and each has its advantages and disadvantages . Therefore , a well-balanced portfolio is essential so you can make use of all the advantages offered and limit the disadvantages of each product . In addition to the type of insurance you are purchasing , your gender , health , tobacco use or non-use , recent hospitalizations and sometimes your hobbies and career etc. will all be considered when calculating the premiums .
The advantages of life insurance can be significant if applied correctly to the planning need in behalf of the policy insureds beneficiaries . The tax advantaged features and the economic leverage of life insurance is unique among financial products . In addition , a TAMRA compliant non modified endowment policy can generate tax free distributions as long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured . The disadvantages of life insurance are zero . As a product , it can be misapplied , misunderstood , but not a disadvantage .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Electrical Wiring ?
The key word to remember in connection with a homeowners policy is damage . The policy is not designed to correct deficiencies or pay for routine maintenance . Wiring does have a special place in a homeowners policy in that when there has been damage from a covered source the work of restoring the property might include changes in the wiring and plumbing to meet the requirements of the current building code . Additional coverage to pay for that expense can be added to your homeowners policy .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
If your electrical wiring is just old , deterioratingand or wore out then no , homeownersinsurancedoes not cover electrical wiring . However if the wiring , arcs or causes a house fire then yes , homeowners insurance does cover the damage to the dwelling caused by theelectricalwiring . I will call your local agent to discuss the specifics of your question orre-postwith more detail as to what you are looking for .
Electrical wiring is not covered for wear and tear or deterioration . Electrical wiring would be covered for surging , arching that would of resulted indamageto the dwelling -LRB- structure -RRB- . I recommend you contact your local agent to discuss any specifics of a potential loss due to electrical wiring of the property .
Electrical wiring would only be covered if it is damaged by a covered peril . Homeowners insurance does not pay to replace out dated wiring or renovation of wiring . Homeowners insurance is not designed as a maintenance policy . It is designed to protect you from unforeseeable events such as fire , wind damage , lightning strikes and similar perils .
Every homeowners application I have seen asks the question is there aluminum wiring ? They also ask if there is knob and tube wiring . These forms of electrical distribution only exist in homes over 40 years of age . These forms of wiring are potentially hazardous . Most insurers are not interested in houses with either form of wiring . That doesnt mean that it would be impossible to find coverage , however , rewiring the home may be a less costly option .
A homeowners policy will cover the home and contents in the even of damage due to wind , fire , hail , smoke , etc. . It does not cover wear and tear and breakdown of your appliances . Nor does it cover plumbing and/or electrical wiring . Water damage is covered at an additional cost depending on what type of policy you have . Its always best to consult your agent on the specifics of your policy .
The key word to remember in connection with a homeowners policy is damage . The policy is not designed to correct deficiencies or pay for routine maintenance . Wiring does have a special place in a homeowners policy in that when there has been damage from a covered source the work of restoring the property might include changes in the wiring and plumbing to meet the requirements of the current building code . Additional coverage to pay for that expense can be added to your homeowners policy .
In most cases electricity comes from a source outside of the residence . Fluctuations or loss of electricity from an outside source is probably excluded from your homeowners policy . If the loss of electricity is a result of something that happens to your residence , such as a fire , damages from lost electricity would most likely be covered .
Generally speaking , yes , a standard `` all risk '' Homeowners policy would cover damage resulting from a lightening strike . Certainly damage to your house itself , but also that caused by the sudden electrical surge through either power or cable lines that might damage or destroy appliances or other components would all be covered under your homeowners ' policy . IN addition , if the electrical storm knocks your poer out and you arein teh dark for several days , in many cases your homeowners ' policy would also pay to replace lost food items out of your regrigeratorand freezer .
No , homeowners insurance does not cover maintenance . If you have a covered loss the replacement of any damaged electrical components would be included but it will not pay for general electrical work . Covered loss would be things like fire , lightening , wind , hail , weight of ice and snow . Check with your agent if you feel your loss may be covered .
Medicare does not cover routine dental services . Services such as checkups , cleanings , fillings , dentures , etc. will be covered by an individual dental insurance plan . If you 're receiving oral care in a hospital -LRB- e.g. surgery to repair a broken jaw , wiring it shut , etc. -RRB- , Medicare can cover the services provided .
That is a great question ! There have been issues with Federal-Pacific breaker boxes for years - I 've heard that nearly 1 in 4 are defective ... They were actually investigated some years ago , and found guilty of fraudulent testing . Faulty wiring is usually a covered expense so your homeowners policy should cover some or all of the cost -LRB- minus deductible -RRB- . They put an awful lot of those things in homes during that time , so there are a lot of folks in the same boat you are . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
This is a great question . Homeowners insurance rates are on the rise in Oklahoma due to all of the claims activity over the past several years . There are many factors to what generates your homeowner 's insurance premium . I hope this makes sense to you and answers your question . Here are some questions that you need to answer prior to receiving a quotation . Where do you live ? Is it a rural area with a volunteer fire department or do you live in a city with a full time fire department ? In the event of a fire , how long would the response time be for the fire fighters to get to your house ? Where is the closest fire hydrant ? What 's the replacement cost of your home ? Not the value of your home . How old is your house ? What is the construction type of your house ? Brick house ? Frame ? Do you have a crawl space or a slab ? Do you have carpeted floors , tile , other ? If your home is older than 20 years , when was your roof last replaced ? Has the wiring been updated ? Has the plumbing been updated ? Do you have an alarm system ? Do you have any pets ? Any children ? Who is living in the home ? Any fireplaces or wood burning stoves ? What deductible amount are you comfortable with ? What do you do for a living ? Do you have a home business ? These are just a few of many questions that your agent or future agent should ask you . Please let me know if I can answer any additional questions or help you out in any way . All the best , Josh DeBoer Fred Daniel & Sons , Inc. www.fdands.com 918-582-8206
If electrical equipment inside your unit is damaged as a result of a power surge or interruption that originates outside the unit , that damage is specifically excluded . If there is a fire that causes electrical damage , that damage would be covered . If an electrical appliance inside the unit catches fire and damages part of the unit or your personal property , that would probably be covered .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
Most homeowners policies specifically exclude damages that are the result of artificially generated electrical currents . The do cover lightning which is a natural electrical current . Most specifically exclude damage to electronic components .
One of the many benefits of life insurance is the easy process to borrow money from your policy . Call the insurance company and ask them to send the money to you . They will send a check or wire the money . There are no credit applications or credit checks and your employment status does not matter . Of course you must have enough cash in your policy to borrow from and still keep the policy in-force , but it is an easy process .
Guidelines for what type of bed Medicare will pay for varies by state . In all states , Medicare will not pay for the cost of a fully electric bed . However , Medicare will pay for the cost of a semi-electric bed when there is a medical necessity for that type of bed . You can then pay for the difference so that you can purchase a fully electric bed , if desired .
Medicare Part B will pay for an electric wheelchair if all the following exist : 1 -RRB- Your wheelchair must be medically necessary and your doctor must order it after a face to face evaluation with you to determine/explain that need . 2 -RRB- You must be able to safely operate an electric wheelchair and get on and off of it safely -LRB- either by yourself or have someone there to assist you -RRB- 3 -RRB- You must be unable to do one or more Activities of Daily Living without it and a less costly assistive device will not enable you to dot that ADL -LRB- s -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You must have the type of home that accommodates use of an electric wheelchair .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Qualifies As An Erisa Qualified Retirement Plan ?
On September 2 , 1974 the Employee Retirement Income Security Act became law . The law was to establish financial disclosure of fees , standards for fiduciaries and provide guidance for plan participants . Recently 408 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 2 -RRB- was added to shore up the full disclosure of plan costs . Plans developed under ERISA like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s permit tax deductible contributions and tax deferred accumulation with distributions taxable as ordinary income .
Non-qualified retirement plans are not sanctioned for the tax deduction like qualified plans are under ERISA . Non-qualified retirement plans generally use annuities and life insurance . Annuities can be used in qualified plans , but life insurance can not . Non-qualified and qualified retirement plans using annuities , for an example , accumulate tax deferred , but the basis of a non-qualified annuity is distributed free of taxation , whereas qualified annuities are fully taxable including basis .
Non-Qualified is a term generally used for non ERISA retirement plans or qualified plans . A life insurance company does n't manufacture qualified products . Annuities , like life insurance , start out as non-qualified product lines not under the jurisdiction of ERISA . Non-qualified annuity payouts distribute basis tax free , whereas qualified annuity payouts are all taxable , even basis .
There are two types of retirement categories : ERISA sanctioned qualified plans and non ERISA , non-qualified plans . ERISA plans like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 412 -LRB- i -RRB- allow tax deduction able contributions , tax deferred accumulations and taxable distributions . Non ERISA non-qualified plans have no tax deductibility , but have tax deferred accumulations . The distributions depend on the product line . Annuities gains are taxed as ordinary income and TAMRA compliant permanent life insurance can generate tax free income providing the contract is just in force for the life of the inured .
The cost of a Retirement Plan is the first consideration . Whatever investments you select , there will be an associated cost and the retirement plan will only add to it . So important to select the lowest cost plans with the highest contribution limits . If youre in a high tax bracket and/or your employer matches your contribution , youll want to consider an ERISA qualified plan . If ERISA qualified plans are too restrictive , you may want to consider non qualified plan that uses life insurance and/or annuities .
No , the retirement plan offered by the military is not qualified . Public sector pension plans are not covered by ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- , and in order for a retirement plan to be qualified , it must meet the regulations set forth by ERISA . Therefore , the military 's retirement plan offered through the federal government is nonqualified .
There are two types of tax deferred retirement plans : qualified and non-qualified . Qualified plans that can accumulate tax deferred like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- s , 412 -LRB- e -RRB- s are under ERISA , The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . Non-qualified retirement plans that use life insurance and annuities accumulate tax deferred as well .
The service addresses both ERISA qualified plans and other nonqualified supplemental retirement plans . Assuming this question is addressing ERISA qualified plans , there are several retirement plans such as the popular 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- and 412 -LRB- i -RRB- as well as others such as cash balance plans defined benefit plans , defined contribution plans , profit sharing plans .
Life insurance is not an ERISA plan . However , life insurance purchased in a pension plan has ERISA implications . ERISA is a federal law which dates back to 1974 that sets minimum standards for retirement plans in the private sector . The protections provided to plan participants are extensive . To the extent that retirement plans utilize life insurance and related products as plan assets , the standards and protections can indirectly apply to such products . For example , there are specific rules for qualified retirement plans which place limits on life insurance as a plan asset .
Most self-employed business is cost conscience , so the plan with the least amount of expenses is a good starting point in the discovery process . Whatever investments you select , there will be an associated cost and the retirement plan will only add to it . So important to select the lowest cost plans with the highest contribution limits . If youre in a high tax bracket and/or your employer matches your contribution , youll want to consider an ERISA qualified plan . If ERISA qualified plans are too restrictive , you may want to consider non-qualified plan that uses life insurance and/or annuities .
An annuity is inherently a non-qualified insurance product . A qualifies plan is generally an ERISA -LRB- The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 -RRB- sanctioned retirement plan like an employer sponsored 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or an individual plan like an IRA . You can fund a qualified plan with an annuity , but all distributions from the annuity in the qualified plan , including basis , are taxable as ordinary income .
Qualified annuities generally refer to tax deferred annuities is a qualified plan like ab ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 -LRB- qualified plan such as a 410 -LRB- k -RRB- . By inserting tax deferred annuities into a qualified plan contribution re-characterizes the basis as taxable during distributions , i.e. the entire annuity distributions are taxable as ordinary income .
Qualified retirement plans can be defined benefit or contribution plan . In a defined contribution plan , the contributions are pretax -LRB- or qualified -RRB- . The accounts accumulate tax deferred and distributions are taxable as ordinary income tax rates . Qualified defined contribution plans , like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , are under ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . -RRB-
ERISA does n't directly address life insurance . ERISA is a federal law which dates back to 1974 that sets minimum standards for retirement plans in the private sector . The protections provided to plan participants are extensive . To the extent that retirement plans utilize life insurance and related products as plan assets , the standards and protections can indirectly apply to such products . For example , there are specific rules for qualified retirement plans which place limits on life insurance as a plan asset .
It means that you 'll receive whatever full benefit you have accumulated or qualified to receive . The opposite of vesting would be forfeiture . In other words , if you are not fully vested under a plan you will forfeit certain benefits -LRB- and in some cases all benefits -RRB- if you terminate from the plan . Vesting a process that takes place over time and is used to encourage employees to stay in the plan -LRB- i.e. stay with the company -RRB- . Conversely it can also be used somewhat nefariously as a way to prevent payment of certain benefits , or to prevent the obligation of paying certain benefits to shorter term employees . Vesting as a practice is guided by rules set forth by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act -LRB- ERISA -RRB- . ERISA also requires full automatic vesting for any employee who has reached his or her `` normal '' retirement age , defined in the United States as the age at which you become qualified for full Social Security retirement income benefits . This automatic vesting happens regardless of years served as per normal vesting schedules .
An ESOP -LRB- employee stock ownership plan -RRB- can be either qualified or non-qualified . Essentially each plan is funded with employer stock but beyond that there are differences . A non-qualified ESOP is not subject to ERISA and they do not have the same tax favored benefits as a qualified ESOP . Non-qualified ESOPs have a risk of forfeiture and can be used in a golden handcuffs arrangement .
The IRS is looks to regulatory legislation like ERISA , the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 for guidance on qualified defined benefit and contributions plans . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a employer spoored qualified defined contribution plan under ERISA , so the IRS recognizes the tax destructibility and tax deferral of 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions .
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 -LRB- ERISA -RRB- qualifies a plan for tax favored treatment and regulatory requirements and rules of engagement . A qualified defined benefit or contribution plan under ERISA will have compliance items that administrators must adhere to . 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , IRA , SEP IRA are some examples .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
A qualified retirement plan , like those under ERISA -LRB- the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 , -RRB- are tax deductible to the plan participant . Examples of qualified plans that are deductible are 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , IRAs , SEP IRAs . There are other tax dedcutible plans as well like 412 -LRB- e -RRB- and HR 10 plans .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
When Can An Auto Insurance Company Sue Me ?
An example of being sued by an insurance company would be : Your have been found at fault in an accident . Now you either had no insurance or your insurance coverage 's were to low to pay the damages . The latter is very common . The other parties insurance company paid for their own insureds damages and is now seeking to recover it 's losses . So lets say for example you did have some coverage but the coverage 's you carried were to low . Your insurance company would of paid the claim up to the limit you carried . This turns out to not be enough and the person you hit insurance company , having had to pay beyond what your insurance company would pay will sue to recover the additional monies paid out . Moral of the story : Carry the highest liability and property damage limits you can afford . Do not waste your money on a low deductible for your own car . This amount is minimal compared to what you can lose in a liability suit .
You can not sue someone for not having auto insurance . You can sue a person if the persons or party caused bodily injury and/or property damage to you . Auto insurance would normally cover the persons or party in this situation which is why you would carry auto insurance in the first place . However if the persons or party does not have the coverage you may take them to court to seek restitution . But you can not sue the persons or party just for not having auto insurance .
You can be sued by an auto insurance company . If you are involved in an accident and determined to be at fault but do not have any or enough insurance to cover the claims , the company can sue you for the amount paid to their client . A company could also sue if a claim was paid to you and it was later determined to have been overpaid or fraud . The company can sue to get the money that should not have been paid .
Yes and auto insurance carrier at their discretion can bring a law suit against you . Auto insurance companies only sue to recover their loss and no more . So for example you caused an accident and they person you hit used his or her insurance to pay for the damage to their car because you had no insurance . The insurance company may want to recover what they paid out since their client was not at fault . Therefore the insurance company could take you to court to recover the monies spent for the repairs . No lets take it a step further . Say you were the one who was hit and were also injured . Your insurance company if they did not pay for your injuries will not sue for injury , pain and suffering and so on since the insurance company did not suffer a loss in this area . Again , insurance companies will only try to recover their own loss .
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
A homeowners policy is a legal contract . That contract may include a provision that says that you can not sue the company but must arbitrate . You should consult with an attorney . In most states you would still be free to sue . You would basically sue the company for not performing their obligations under the contract .
If the Company is paying its employees to drive the vehicles , the company must have a Commercial Auto Policy . The commercial auto policy also must include non-owned vehicle coverage when your employees are driving the car . The customer can not sign an agreement to only sue the driver because the insurance company the customer has is required to act on behalf of the customer regarding subrogation . The company 's insurance will be responsible for any damage or theft while the vehicle is in the company employee 's possesion . Keith Prim - Dallas - 214-435-0791
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
This one is really dependent upon the circumstances and where you live . I can only speak to how Michigan will treat it . Since we 're a No-Fault state , if your car is damaged , your insurance will cover the damage to your car -LRB- if you have physical damage coverage -RRB- . If you do n't carry physical damage coverage you can sue for up to $ 1,000 in small claims court . Now , most people in Michigan have coverage for this under their policies and will pay it out without going to court . You simply contact their company , explain the circumstances and submit a police report showing their driver is at fault . They usually pay these very quickly . If it 's not for physical damage to a car , you may be able to do the same thing , but the outcome may be very different . If it 's for property damage or an injury , they may or may not work with you . It 's very possible you may have to sue the other driver to recover any damages . Remember , their insurance company represents their driver , not you . I would advise my clients to get an estimate on any damage to a car and to consult a doctor with any injury . Then , depending on what you find out , make a determination on whether it 's worth pursuing . Any time you sue , there 's a lot of time and energy involved and the outcome is not certain . You need to be able to put a dollar amount on it before you proceed . Get your ducks in a row first , then you 'll be in a much better position .
That is a great question ! The simple fact is that you can sue anybody , or any company . All you will need is a competent lawyer , a good reason to sue , and a solid winnable case . If you have all of those things , then you can bring suit against your insurance company . Good luck . Thanks for asking !
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
Yes , you can sue a health insurance company . But you should have a very good reason to sue , retain an excellent attorney and have VERY deep pockets because it 's going to cost you time and an incredible amount of money . If you believe you have a great cause , consult an attorney . You never know what may happen .
An insurance policy is a legal contract . A legal contract always requires consideration . That means money must change hands . I could promise you a free trip to the moon but if you dont pay me anything the most you could sue me for would be breach of promise . You couldnt say I broke a contract even if my promise was in writing . Insurance is based on the idea that the premium is paid prior to the start of coverage . I doubt you will find anyone that will truly provide insurance without a down-payment and if you do , check to make sure you arent taking out a loan to do so .
The reason why landlords want insurance is to protect themselves for either property loss or a liability suit . If you are a tenant in a commercial building and a client of yours gets hurt on your premises then that client may potentially sue you . If you have no insurance the client may sue the building owner just because it 's the landlords building even though the tenant may be the party who caused the loss . Same is true for private residences . The landlord does not want to take on a suit because your friend fell down in your home . Now for the record , just because the victim goes after the landlord does not mean you are off the hook as a tenant . If the landlords insurance ends up having to pay a claim you can almost surely bet they are coming after you so my suggestion is carry the insurance . There are way to many upsides and virtually no down side .
Landlords are concerned about liability arising from your possession of their property . If a guest of yours slips inside the unit and is injured they will certainly sue you but may also sue the landlord . This is why the landlord often requires that you maintain a renters policy that will address suits arising from personal injury and physical damage . By having you secure a policy and name them as additional insured they are less vulnerable to lawsuit . Additionally , tenants rarely fully appreciate that if something happens to the unit and your personal property is damaged or destroyed , the landlord doesnt have any liability . If you have a renters policy there is some money available to restore what you have lost .
Mark has given you a factual answer but let me give you a personal answer . A renters policy costs less than the loss you might suffer should your property be damaged as a result of a covered loss -LRB- fire , wind etc. -RRB- Insurance isnt a tax but sharing of a risk . Unless you can buy everything in your unit today out of your checking account , having a renters policy makes great sense . The real reason to have a renters policy is to defend you should you be sued for bodily injury or property damage . Anyone entering the property could sue you if they slip and fall or your pet decides to taste their leg . These are really serious issues and the expense can be enormous . Few of us can sustain that type of claim . While Mark mentioned a $ 100,000 liability limit , let me suggest that you take the highest limit that your insurance company offers . Let them take the risk , the premium is insignificant in comparison to the risk .
There are circumstances under which an insurance company might sue . They might sue to recover damages that they paid to their policyholder when you were at fault . The might sue to recover money paid to you that was paid under false pretenses . They might sue you if you have attempted to defraud them by staging an accident , having multiple policies on the same car or other means .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Consult with state law to make sure that is permissible . Your lender will take a dim view of your driving an uninsured vehicle . Normally they require insurance to protect their interests in their collateral . If you can pay the injured and repair the damage to all the vehicles in a collision then you probably dont need auto insurance . Oh did I mention that everyone involved can sue you into bankruptcy .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Do I Estimate Home Insurance ?
To obtain an Estimate of Home Insurance , you would need to answer a few questions relative to the risk.The basic characteristics of the home to be insured including the Year Built , Square Footage , Type of Roof and the Use of the Home -LRB- Owner Occupied or Tenant Occupied -RRB- will help assess the correct reconstruction value of the home . In addition , you will need to list any safety features such as Deadbolts , Smoke Detectors , Fire Extinguishers , Central Station Alarm Monitoring & Fire Sprinklers ; these items will most likely either be necessary for qualification or offer a security discount depending on the program . For a simple self service homeowners insurance quotation , there is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
To estimate the cost of homeowners insurance , ask a neighbor with a similar home . If there is a home built by the same builder nearby you might be able to estimate a premium based upon the relative value of your home and the other home . This is a very rough way to estimate the cost but should help .
If you are seeking to estimate how much life insurance you need , many people purchase 10 times their annual salary as a life insurance face amount . Others use life insurance calculators to more accurately determine that amount . If you are trying to estimate how much your life insurance would cost , you can do that by going to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes . There you can put in different face amounts and term lengths to at least estimate the cost of term coverage , although most quote engines do now show permanent options , and the rates will depend on your health .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
In order to determine the proper protection on your home insurance carriers or more specifically the agents will runreplacementcost estimators on the home . Thereplacementcost estimator will determine what it will cost to rebuild a home in the event of a total loss . Thisfigurehas no bearing on what the market value of a home is . In California you see market values of homes ranging on average around $ 800,000 . However the actual construction cost to rebuild may only be $ 450,000 since land is not taken into consideration . The reverse can also be true . The market may have sunk in a given area so that same house is now only worth $ 200,000 on the market but it still costs $ 450,000 to rebuild since the cost of construction has not changed . Always have a discussion with your agent about the details of your home so a proper replacement amount can be determined and you are properly insured .
There are several forms of homeowners insurance . The HO-3 is the most common form and it provides replacement cost coverage for the residence . Most insurance companies will require that you insure the home to its replacement cost . There are services that estimate the cost of replacing your home . The insurance companies normally accept their estimates . If you feel the estimate might be too high , many insurers will insure to a value that is guaranteed by a local contractor . If the contractor states that he can replace the residence for a specific amount and guarantees that for a period of time , the underwriter might issue a policy for that amount .
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
Coverage A-Dwelling , on your declaration page is the amount of money your home is insured for against covered perils . How much should your limit be ? It should be the amount of money you need to rebuild your house from scratch . That amount of money is called Replacement Cost . How do you determine the Replacement Cost Value ? To determine the Replacement Cost Value , you need to know or measure the square footage of your home . You also need to know the special features of your home , like skylights , central vacuums , etc. . You also need to know the quality of your improvements . For example , are your kitchen and bathroom fixtures Builders Grade or Luxury ? If you can gather that information , call your agent and review it with them . They should be able to help you come up with a reasonable estimate of your homes replacement value . You should revisit the value every three to five years or after you make a significant improvement . You want to keep pace with your homes value , but you dont want to over insurance and waste money . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
I generally agree with David 's answer . But I would add a few more items to consider . What your agent is developing in a Replacement Cost Calculator is only an estimate . The actual replacement of home depends on a number of factors that might change by the time loss occurs . For example we can identify that building one hose back in the instance of a total fire loss will likely cost more than the original building costs were when the builder may have building an entire subdivision . Yet losses to insured homes can be substantially more than expected if an entire city shares the same loss . That is what you get in some tornado or hurricane events.The fact that so many are affected increases do to shortage of materials and labor . So , here is what I recommend : Get as close to a number that you and your agent think represents the total replacement cost . Then buy an Extension of coverage . Many companies sell this at increments of 25 % ,50 % or even 100 % . What the extension does is move the limit to a higher level of protection at the time of loss if needed . An example would be to take the estimated replacement cost of 300,000 up to 375,000 in the event more coverage is need on the home at time a of loss and a 25 % extension has been purchased .
Because home insurance is most often written on a replacement basis , the home is normally insured for the estimated cost of rebuilding the same home at the same place . There are a number of services that have computerized estimating services . Insurance companies generally prefer one rating service over another .
That is a great question ! A life insurance quote is like the estimate that you would get before having repairs done on your home or on your car . The estimate gives you an idea of what the expected cost of the repairs will be , and the insurance quote does the same thing . It is the expected cost of your insurance . Both estimates can be on the mark , or different depending upon what the company finds when they start looking closely at the work . In the case of life insurance , that would be your medical history , the underwriting decisions , and the prescription history that you have . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
I can not speak for all insurance companies , but in my experience insurance companies will do either one of two things . 1 -RRB- Accept the estimate prepared by the mechanic . 2 -RRB- Send an insurance adjuster to look at the damaged vehicle to prepare an estimate . The estimate is based on cost of labor and parts .
I just completed an estimated replacement cost for a home with a covered porch . Yes , it did take the cost of replacing that covered porch into the estimate for rebuilding the home . It isnt treated as though it were a finished part of the house but merely the cost of replacing the roof over the porch .
The dwelling limit for your home should be equal to the amount that it will cost to rebuild your home . This is going to vary based on type of construction materials , current costs of materials , and labor costs . Most reputable agents will use a third party estimator which considers all of these factors to come up with a replacement cost number . You should never pick a replacement cost number out of thin air . Additionally , do not be surprised if the replacement estimate that you are given differs from the market value or the appraised value . You are n't insuring the dirt !
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
South Carolina Homeowners Insurance is similar to home insurance in any other State . You will need to have a good insurance policy to cover your home , personal belongings and personal liability coverage to protect you from legal action due to negligence . The home -LRB- dwelling -RRB- should be covered for the value to reconstruct the home following a total loss . Most insurance companies will simply ask you a few characteristic questions about your home and calculated the estimated reconstruction value of the home . Please note , the reconstruction value of the home is not relative to the current market sales price of the property which could fluctuate in differing market conditions and also includes the value of the land -LRB- which remains uninsured -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
There are so many factors in pricing your lifeinsurance , it 's impossible to estimate the cost . How much do you need ? How long do you need it ? What gender are you ? Are you smoker ? Are you healthy ? Is your family health historygood ? Do you have dangerous recreational activities ? Is your motor vehicle record clean ? Do you have substance abuse problems with drugs oralcohol ? Do you have a felony ? Is your credit good ? Just to name a few of the factors that enter into the price tag of lifeinsurance .
You must be a mortgage broker or you 're buying your first home . I get this question all the time from mortgage company reps and first-time home buyers . There are many factors that make up a home insurance rate . Location of the home Age of the home Credit of the insured Other policies for discounts Coverage options you choose Most mortgage brokers use $ 50/m as an estimate as they work up your paperwork . My advice would be to work with a licensed agent that represents multiple insurance companies so they can shop for you .
The best way to think about it is , to imagine that your unit has been gutted by a fire . You have lost everything that you own . How much money will you want ? If you take pictures of your unit you will know what you had . If you estimated the replacement cost for each item , you would know how much you would want . I suggest that number guide you in selecting a renters policy . If a process server appears at your door with a lawsuit , how much back up do you want ? I suggest you take as much liability coverage as the insurance company offers .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Do I Need Part C Of Medicare ?
You do n't `` need '' Medicare Part C , but you may choose to have it as your Medicare coverage . Medicare Part C is really known as the Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO . Part C combines your Original Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- medical -RRB- , and usually Part D -LRB- drugs -RRB- . It 's important to note that if you have Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- , you do n't need a Medigap Policy and ca n't be sold one to help supplement your health care . You can only purchase a Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- , if you are still on Original Medicare Part A and Part B . There are a lot of moving parts to Medicare . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Part C is not a requirement of Medicare . It is often referred to as Medicare Advantage . A Medicare Advantage plan can have Part D -LRB- prescription drugs -RRB- included in the coverage , a Medigap Policy can not . You must have Medicare part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Medicare part B -LRB- medical -RRB- to enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan or a Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- .
Medicare Part C is a catch-all for Medicare Advantage plans . When you enroll in an MA plan you are no longer in original Medicare but rather are in a `` privatized '' Medicare system . So you either have original Medicare -LRB- Part A and/or Part B -RRB- or you have an MA plan , but you do not have both .
You do n't `` need '' Medicare Part C , but you may choose to have it as your Medicare coverage . Medicare Part C is really known as the Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO . Part C combines your Original Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- medical -RRB- , and usually Part D -LRB- drugs -RRB- . It 's important to note that if you have Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- , you do n't need a Medigap Policy and ca n't be sold one to help supplement your health care . You can only purchase a Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- , if you are still on Original Medicare Part A and Part B . There are a lot of moving parts to Medicare . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
According to Social Security , you are automatically enrolled in Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . The two parts of Medicare coverage you are enrolled in are the hospital insurance and medical insurance . Hospital insurance -LRB- Part A -RRB- is established to help pay for your inpatient hospital bills and some of your follow-up care . The taxes you paid while working helped pay for Part A coverage , so it 's no cost to you . Medical insurance -LRB- Part B -RRB- is provided to help pay your doctors ' bills , outpatient hospital care , and some other medical services . If you choose to enroll in Part B , this coverage comes with a monthly premium . Some other parts of Medicare include : Medicare Advantage -LRB- Part C -RRB- Prescription Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- Part C plans are made available in many areas across the country . Part C allows you to receive all of your health care services through medical plans offered by Medicare approved private companies . Once you are on Medicare , you also have access to Part D or Prescription Drug Coverage . This type of coverage helps pay for your doctor prescribed medication . If you are a Medicare Beneficiary with low-income , you may be able to get assistance through your state for the payment of your Medicare premiums . To see if you qualify for assistance , it is best to contact your state or local Medicaid agency or welfare office .
Medigap and Medicare Part C are not the same . Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- policy is private health insurance established to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans with benefits designed to pay for Medicare approved charges not covered by Part A and Part B. Part C refers to a Medicare Advantage Plan . This type of Plan acts like an HMO or PPO . It combines your Medicare Part A and Part B , and usually Part D into one Plan -LRB- Part C -RRB- .
Medigap and Part C are not the same . Medigap is supplemental coverage to your Original Medicare Part A and B . You do n't have to buy a Medigap Plan , it is optional . Many people , however , use the Medigap Policy to help cover the 20 % of Medicare approved costs not covered by Part A and B. Medicare Supplement insurance is private insurance in which you pay a premium every month . You are allowed to visit any provider who accepts Medicare . Part C is called a Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO , so you are restricted to using network doctors . This type of Plan combines Part A , Part B , and usually Part D -LRB- drug coverage -RRB- . It 's important to note , if you join a Medicare Advantage Plan , you do n't need and ca n't be sold a Medigap Policy . In other words , you ca n't buy a Medigap Policy to supplement your Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
This can be a bit confusing : when you use the word Part you are referring to Medicare . When you use the word Plan , you are referring to Medigap plans which are sometimes referred to as Medicare `` supplements . '' As indicated in an earlier post , Medicare Part C is Medicare Advantage . Medigap Plans are identified individually as plans A through G , and K through N There are Medigap Plans A , B , C , & D , which tends to confuse people because Medicare Has Parts A , B , C , & D. For more information on Medicare Parts A , B , C , & D , refer to page 15 in your Medicare and You 2016 handbook . For more information on all Medigap Plans , refer to page 101 in your Medicare and You 2016 handbook . You can download a copy of the Medicare and You 2016 handbook ; go to : WEBSITELINK
I presume you mean Medicare Part C. Medicare Part C was conceived in the 1990 's and offered participants an alternative to traditional Medicare . Most of the Part C plans were HMO 's and have very limited coverage area and limited provider networks . Most Part C plans are now available as Medicare Advantage plans , many of which also have limited geographic service areas , limited provider networks , and considerable out of pocket liability on a large claim .
Plan C in Medicare Supplemental policies is simply a plan that offers its own set of options , as do Med Supp Plans A to N. Part C in Medicare is also called Medicare Advantage . Part C is a combination of Medicare Part A , Part B , and usually , Part D .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
The passage of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 is when Medicare Part + Choice , or Medicare Part C , was created . At this time , the choice was given to purchase Medicare Part C -LRB- Advantage Plans -RRB- in addition to traditional Part A and B. Medicare Part C is offered and administered through private insurance companies and and regulated by Medicare .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and can help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How To Shop For Long Term Disability Insurance ?
How to shop for long term disability care insurance ? First start with a group of companies to compare from . Then READ the plans . The most important anything in a disability policy is the definition of what is disability . It does n't matter how long or how much if you never met the definition of disability stated inside the policy . The cheapest premiums with the highest payouts mean nothing if you never meet the policy 's definition .
You can shop for long term disability insurance over the internet , phone , or by going to an office that sells disability insurance products . A good place to find an agent would be to read answers from agents answering disability insurance questions on this website . I would ask them if they sell with more than one company , so that you do n't have to visit multiple websites to get a variety of quotes . They will need to ask you health and occupation questions in order to match you up with a product you can qualify for , and to get you the best price .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
How to shop for long term disability care insurance ? First start with a group of companies to compare from . Then READ the plans . The most important anything in a disability policy is the definition of what is disability . It does n't matter how long or how much if you never met the definition of disability stated inside the policy . The cheapest premiums with the highest payouts mean nothing if you never meet the policy 's definition .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
There are many factors to consider when purchasing disability insurance . Here are some of the basics to keep in mind . First how much money do you keep in saving ? Could you pay your bills for 2 weeks , a month , 6 months or a year ? This will help you determine your elimination period . This is the time that passes between your medical diagnosis of the disability and when you begin to receive benefits . The most common are 30-60-90-180-360 days with long term disability . If you need benefits within days or a week , consider purchasing a short term disability plan to pay faster but only pays up to a shorter benefit period such as 6 months to a year . many people buy both short term and long term plans . The last thing to consider is benefit amount . Disability plans can pay out as high as 70 % of your current income . However , some plans only pay up to 50 % or lower . Be sure the amount is correct . I recommend using an independent disability insurance broker to shop for your options and find the right plan at the right price for your unique situation . Our advise is free and we are compensated by the insurance carrier .
There are online outlets for short term disability but before you start shopping for short term disability insurance , find out if your employer sponsored group plan offers it . Many of these types of plans offer short term disability insurance as part of the overall employee benefits.But if you have to shop , start online with brokerage outlets that specialize or have complete departments dedicated to disability insurance . Most of these firms have access to a wide range of carriers that can spread sheet the players in disability insurance .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
Before you start shopping for short term disability insurance , find out if your employer sponsored group plan offers it . Many of these types of plans offer short term disability insurance as part of the overall employee benefits.But if you have to shop , start online with brokerage outlets that specialize or have complete departments dedicated to disability insurance . Most of these firms have access to a wide range of carriers that can spread sheet the players in disability insurance .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
Most advisers desire their clients to have long term disability insurance . But financial circumstances may not permit . But before your go shopping for short term disability , check with your employer sponsored group benefit plan , which generally includes short term disability at no cost to the employee . Mutual of Omaha is a leading carrier for short term disability insurance .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is The Best Medicare Advantage Plan In New York ?
The best Medicare Advantage plan in New York will depend on your specific needs and perhaps what part of the state you reside in . It is absolutely critical to utilize a licensed experienced full-time broker that works with MA plans . They will be able to explain details and if a Medical Advantage plan is right for you .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
The state of New York is one of the most highly regulated states in the country . Residents of New York general pay more for coverage . It 's critical in securing the best possible price tag by going online to a brokerage firm that has an extension inventory of New York approved careers to secure the best deal .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Guardian Life Insurance Company of America is a mutual company based in New York City , New York . They also have regional offices all across the northern states , from Washington to New York . Rated A + + by AM Best , Guardian Life Insurance Company has several subsidiaries , including Berkshire Life Insurance Company of America .
The best Medicare Advantage plan in New York will depend on your specific needs and perhaps what part of the state you reside in . It is absolutely critical to utilize a licensed experienced full-time broker that works with MA plans . They will be able to explain details and if a Medical Advantage plan is right for you .
Car insurance rates in New York are determined by many variables . Some of the most important factors are your driving record -LRB- including other family members -RRB- , your zip code or county , your age , the type of vehicle you drive , your credit history , how the vehicle is used and the types of coverage you carry . Additionally , the company you are insured with plays a big role in determining the rates . So ... how do you get a free quote for car insurance in New York ? A reputable nationwide -LRB- or New York based -RRB- car insurance website will zoom -LRB- pun intended -RRB- you to your destination . Typically , you can compare the best offers and get expert advice at no cost .
Do you really want to do business with a company you personally never heard of and have to ask about ? Or would you be safer and rather do business with a company that is America 's Oldest , Largest , and Highest Rated Life Insurer ? New York Life has been providing Life Insurance to Americans for about 160 years ! Please call me and I can answer your questions about the great advantages of New York Life Insurance . Is n't that what you want for your family ?
Matt is correct . New York Life is an independent national insurance company . We are a mutual company , meaning our policy holders own our company , and we are not beholden to Stock Holders , so we can have lower rates and better service . In addition to Term Policies , we offer our flagship Whole Life Policies , along with Long Term Care Insurance , Annuities , Pension Replacements , College Funding , a variety of Retirement Plans . For details , call a New York Life Agent . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
Yes , absolutely you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . Without it you would not be following the regulations set by New York Department of Financial Services - Insurance Industry . Before obtaining a license to sell life insurance you must study , take a practice -LRB- proctored -RRB- exam and pass . Then , you must pass the ` real exam ' in order to get a license to sell life insurance in New York .
To buy life insurance in New York , you can go to a website that offers it , look through your Yellow Pages and call an agency , or ask friends , relatives or co-workers for a referral . When purchasing online , you can use the quote engines and put in New York to see if they offer policies there . New York has its own companies so not every agency does business there .
Yes . New York Life is a top rated life insurance company . They are a mutual company which means they are owned by their policy owners not Wall Street investors . They are known for their excellent whole-life products . a different division of New York Life sells mail order life insurance which is co-branded by AARP . These are quite different from the New York Life products offered by their agents .
I am happy to report that New York Life is America 's oldest and largest Mutual Life Insurance Company in America . Being a Mutual Life Insurer , means there are no stockholders to try to please . The Owners are the Policy Holders . This can mean substantial savings for Policy Holders of a Mutual Life Insurer like New York Life . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 9497972424 .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
New York Life has relationships with a number of other quality insurance companies to offer many products , including disability insurance . Through these arrangements , customers can work with a New York Life agent to obtain a wide variety of products not underwritten by New York Life itself . Disability insurance can provide peace of mind and removes the uncertainty in case of an accident or sickness that makes someone incapable of working . When considering such coverage , one should review both short term and long term options . Business should also consider Disability insurance for key business persons in the business .
No , Health Insurance DOES NOT cover Long Term Care . Long Term Care needs to be covered through either Long Term Care Insurance , or a Unique Product offered by New York Life called Asset Preserver . New York Life can provide you with Long Term Care Insurance in an extremely large variety of personalized policies , or an Asset Protector which will provide you with Both Life Insurance and Long Term Care in one product . Please call me , Gary Lane , New York Life Agent , for the details that can fit your exact needs .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Is Car Insurance Cheaper When You Are Married ?
The best answer to this is maybe . You can receive discounts for many things when applying for auto insurance . One of the available discounts is being married . However , if you are married , and only have one car then you are effectively nullifying the discount . The reason for this is the corollary discount to being married is the multi-car discount . If you are sharing a car with your spouse , then you will be rated for two drivers with one auto , which means more exposure and subsequently higher premiums . So the best way to maximize your insurance discounts is be married , each drive your own car , and throw on a type of homeowners policy , even if you are just renting . I hope this helps .
Great question ! There are times when you might have separate policies , if there are vehicles that may only be driven by one spouse . An example might be one vehicle is used exclusively for a spouses business . That car would be insured separately from the family car . As Mr. Pipes said , you may also be married , but living apart , and have each vehicle insured separately . Generally , it is cheaper to be together under one policy , unless one spouse has an abysmal drivers record . Thanks for asking !
The best answer to this is maybe . You can receive discounts for many things when applying for auto insurance . One of the available discounts is being married . However , if you are married , and only have one car then you are effectively nullifying the discount . The reason for this is the corollary discount to being married is the multi-car discount . If you are sharing a car with your spouse , then you will be rated for two drivers with one auto , which means more exposure and subsequently higher premiums . So the best way to maximize your insurance discounts is be married , each drive your own car , and throw on a type of homeowners policy , even if you are just renting . I hope this helps .
It is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . Generally speaking , two single individuals insuring their own cars may pay more than two married individuals insuring their two cars together . There are a couple of factors that may cause this . First , the rate structure that a company has for sigle folks as opposed to married folks . The second is a multi car discount aht can further drive down the cost for the married folks . Always be sure to ask about any available discounts when making your decisions on your car insurance .
It 's a lot cheaper to buy when you 're young and healthy than when you 're 60 and have had a heart attack , are diabetic , or have had some other condition that will cause your risk class to be less favorable , which equals higher premiums . The rates will be a lot higher on age alone too - buying $ 1,000,000 of life insurance at 35 and $ 1,000,000 of life insurance at 65 are going to produce very different premiums , regardless of health . Remember though , there has to be a purpose for the benefits and they have to be suitable to you as well . A carrier may not want to approve a policy for you if you 're getting it just cause . There 's many situations that will cause a need for life insurance benefits such as getting married , having a child , and estate planning purposes , just to name a few .
While you 're young and healthy ! It 'll be a lot cheaper than when you 're 60 and have had a heart attack , are diabetic , or have had some other condition that will cause your risk class to be less favorable , which equals higher premiums . The rates will be a lot higher on age alone too - buying $ 1,000,000 of life insurance at 35 and $ 1,000,000 of life insurance at 65 are going to produce very different premiums , regardless of health . Remember though , there has to be a purpose for the benefits and they have to be suitable to you as well . A carrier may not want to approve a policy for you if you 're getting it just cause . There 's many situations that will cause a need for life insurance benefits such as getting married , having a child , and estate planning purposes , just to name a few .
I am not aware of the term joint car policy . However , if you mean , Is it cheaper to have two cars on the same policy or with the same company ? the answer is generally , yes . Most car insurers offer a multi-car discount . If you are really asking if it is cheaper to have an auto policy with two insureds , technically , it doesnt make any difference . In California auto policies are issued to households and all the drivers in the household are considered .
That is a great question ! You can , but there are usually circumstances that make it necessary for separate policies , since as a rule spouses are included as drivers on the single policy . It is easier for the insurer , and cheaper for you if you do . However , if a vehicle is used by one spouse strictly for business , and the other spouse is not a driver of that vehicle , it can happen that you have separate policies . If one spouse has a very poor driving record and has a last resort insurer it is also possible . If you just got married , and have n't yet consolidated the policies , it is also possible . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! The rates for auto insurance are based on a great number of things , and age is one of them . The data from the Insurance Institute of Highway Safety shows that statistically , drivers tend to be safer once they reach the age of 25 . Being married , how long you 've been driving , even your gender can all be factors in the rates . So some companies may lower your rate after your 25th birthday , but some may not . There are just about as many factors that determine your rate increase or decrease as there are companies selling the insurance . If yours does n't , then shop around and see if there is one that is cheaper . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
When you get married your car insurance should be less unless your spouse has a bad driving record or poor credit . Credit is a major factor for car insurance and when you get married some companies will average your credit scores and some will take the highest credit score . Make sure you ask about a multi-car discount as well .
While you 're young and healthy ! It 'll be a lot cheaper than when you 're 60 and have had a heart attack , are diabetic , or have had some other condition that will cause your risk class to be less favorable , which equals higher premiums . The rates will be a lot higher on age alone too - buying $ 1,000,000 of life insurance at 35 and $ 1,000,000 of life insurance at 65 are going to produce very different premiums , regardless of health . Remember though , there has to be a purpose for the benefits and they have to be suitable to you as well . A carrier may not want to approve a policy for you if you 're getting it just cause . There 's many situations that will cause a need for life insurance benefits such as getting married , having a child , and estate planning purposes , just to name a few . Consult with an experienced broker to determine what benefit structure would be most suitable for your specific needs . Please feel free to message me if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
It is very likely that getting married will lower your car insurance rates . For most ages , by combining cars on one policy and taking advantage of the married discount , you 'll likely see some savings ... perhaps substantial . Of course , you can compare rates in advance by simply requesting a free quote . We provide it within moments . But ... Do n't marry someone with a DUI on their record . You might see a major increase , instead of a discount !
Car insurance rates are based on many factors , including your marital status . If you are married , statistically , you have a lower chance of having an at-fault accident compared to if you were single . It 's upon this basis that insurers therefore charge married persons less than a single person that drives the same vehicle and has the same driving record etc. . . The marriage discount is larger when you are younger , and can vary between 10 % -30 % . Although it is substantial , do n't get married just for the discount ! Your spouse may spend a lot more money than you realize !
This is a very complicated subject . In California all the drivers in a household are included on an auto policy . Parents dont want the additional expense of insuring their cars with an inexperienced driver in the household . Some purchase a car and place the car in the 18 year olds name . They then buy the cheapest auto insurance with just the bare legal limits . The problem arises when the inexperienced driver injures others in an accident and the injured party starts suing . The lawyers will not stop at the limits of the policy purchased for the 18 year old . I have seen them even go after grandparents who loaned money to the 18 year old . Your only recourse is the low limit policy purchased for the car . The rest of the lawsuit comes after everything that you own . It is usually cheaper to include the inexperienced driver on the family policy . If you add another car you can isolate the expense to that car but at least you can have the advantages of discounts and perhaps save yourself from bankruptcy down the road .
Being Married or not married is a rating factor in auto insurance . This is not to be mistaken as a discount . Variable rating factors ultimatelydetermine your final rate . Being married in most cases has a favorable rating factor . The criteria is with almost all insurance carriers is you must reside together or be able to explain a really good reason why you are not residing together if you wish to obtain the married rate . The spouse is not necessary required to be listed on the policy as an operator but must be disclosed as a household member .
That is a great question ! There is a reason why cheaper things are cheaper . In the case of life insurance , term policies are much cheaper than whole life policies are . The reason ? Term policies have zero frills . They rarely have to pay out , as the terms usually expire before you do ; and they have nothing extra in the payment but insurance costs , so there is no accumulating cash value either . Term policies can be a good option in some cases , please be sure that you speak with an agent to make sure that it is right for your needs . Thanks for asking !
The only answer I can provide is maybe , and it really depends upon your financial situation . You can drive with Public Liability and Property Damage -LRB- PLPD -RRB- insurance . This covers your liability to another party in the case of an accident . When you get sued for an accident , this is where the huge claims come into play and where most people ca n't for it out of pocket . Comprehensive and collision coverage cover damage to your own vehicle . This type of coverage is not required . Most people only carry PLPD on older cars , where it is cheaper to replace the car then it is to insure it -LRB- e.g. a winter car worth $ 1,200 -RRB- . Now , there are some contractual obligations that might require you to get comprehensive and collision insurance . An example of this is a car lease . The lessor will require full coverage and to be named as a loss payee . This way , in case its collateral is destroyed , it can recoup its financial investment . In summary , make sure you can afford replacing the car if you go with PLPD .
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
Medicare Part A is typically $ 0 as long as you met your 40 quarters -LRB- or 10 years -RRB- of working life and paying FICA taxes -LRB- Medicare taxes -RRB- . If you have not met that requirement , the monthly premium is up to $ 426 per month . For 2014 , the premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 . This can change each year and is based on your modified adjusted gross income on your tax return from 2 years prior . You may also face a high-income premium penalty on your Part B coverage . The $ 104.90 premium is for those with incomes of $ 85,000 or less , if filing an individual tax return , and $ 170,000 , if filing a joint tax return . If your income was between $ 85,000 and $ 107,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 170,000 and $ 214,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 146.90 . If your income was between $ 107,000 and $ 160,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 214,000 and $ 320,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 209.80 . If your income was between $ 160,000 and $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 320,000 and $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 272.70 . If your income was above $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 335.70 . You can encounter other expenses as well such as the Part A and Part B deductibles and late enrollment penalties for not enrolling in Part B when you were first eligible for Medicare . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of healthcare expenses . You 're generally responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan can greatly help establish a predictable expense structure - essential for individuals on a fixed income in retirement . It will limit the amount of cost you 're susceptible to in the event of an illness or injury .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Are The Benefits Of Long Term Care Insurance ?
Some benefits of Long Term Care Insurance are : protection of your estate , having choices in meeting your long term care needs rather than having to take what Medicaid dictates , peace of mind that comes from knowing you will not be a burden to your family if even unable to care for yourself .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
The cost of long term care exceeds the expectation of most people . Long term care can easily erode a substantial amount of money . Because traditional life insurance doesnt address the cost of long term care , these policies are important . The cost for long term care is increasing every year . Companies that once offered Long Term Care have withdrawn from the market . In response some life insurance companies are offering limited living benefits which would act like Long Term Care insurance by paying out part of the death benefit before death occurs .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
How Much Critical Illness Insurance To Buy ?
It would depend on your individual situation . I would look at how much money you would need to keep the family going if youdevelopa critical illness and can not work . Take in consideration disability payments , health insurance , and affordability . A good agent will sit down and help you evaluate your individual situation .
It would depend on your individual situation . The quick answer would be as much as you can afford . Take into consideration what you will lose in income and whatexpensesyou mightincur . Aflac has a tool on their site that can helpdetermine the cost of an illness called the real cost calculator . Check it out at WEBSITELINK This you figure out what you might need and possible cost .
In sports there are `` odds '' ... What are the odds of hitting a hole in one ? An average golfer on a 200-yard par-3 : 150,000 to 1 . Odds of myself or David/Ted -LRB- above -RRB- ... one in TWO ... Ladies are lucky ... it 's only 1 on 3 ... So yes , `` cancer insurance '' is a great protection plan to own . Let 's compare Cancer insurance to protection plan that is growing in popularity , Critical Illness -LRB- CI -RRB- . Cancer insurance covers ?? ... . YES ... ding , ding , ding ... cancer . Most benefits are paid out on a scheduled basis . Meaning you get `` so much for each item eligible for a claim '' . Each treatment/service has a named value : Chemo - So much per treatment . Surgery - a specific amount . Hospital stay - A specific amount per day . Possibly more for ICU . & it goes on ... . Critical Illness pays a lump sum upon diagnosis . There is no need to continually update the carrier about treatments , surgeries , & hospital stays . Think of it as upfront money vs. trickling in over time . Since Critical Illness Insurance typically ahs a benefit for Cancer , heart attack/stroke , and other life changing illnesses -LRB- like blindness & paralysis -RRB- , the one policy can do a lot more for you over a lifetime . Which is better , Cancer or Critical Illness insurance ? As you will see in many of my posts ... UNDERWRITING is the key . Always buy the most coverage for your monthly premium dollars based on the underwriting . - gravy
Right Peggy !! The `` death benefit '' inside a disability policy is usually limited to a few months worth of the `` Monthly Benefit '' . So if your benefit is $ 3,000 a month , then you might get 3 , 6 , maybe 9 thousand in a death benefit . LOOK AT THE LANGUAGE . Does it pay ONLY AFTER you have met an elimination period or is it an immediate benefit ? Disability is a very important plan to own . Yet , I know that buying life insurance , buying disability , buying long term care , buying critical illness , & then buying home , auto , umbrella , & more can be very overwhelming ... . You might consider buying a Living benefits & / or Hybrid Life insurance plan ... These are life insurance plans that you can use BEFORE you die . I have a massage therapist that owns a plan with a death benefit , a $ 30,000 critical illness benefit , and has a $ 1000 a month disability benefit . She pays about $ 43 month for all of this . PERFECT for single mom with a modest income . YES ... standalone Disability has more features and better terms ... yet the all in one plan allows her to cover a critical illness , a disability , & early death . Reach out with questions :--RRB- - gravy
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
Critical illness is a specialized form of what used to be called `` dread disease '' coverage . More comprehensive than a simple cancer plan , critical illness policies normally pay a lump sum benefit on first diagnosis of listed medical conditions including heart attack , cancer , stroke and another 3 - 7 named conditions . Most carriers do not issue critical illness after age 65 or 70 . Buy a health insurance plan , not a life plan with a critical illness rider .
People who buy critical illness insurance are those who have a genetic predisposition to certain illnesses based on family history , smokers -LRB- who have increased risk for getting some diseases -RRB- , those who have had loved ones with critical illnesses and have seen the impact firsthand , and those who do not have savings on hand to pay for the costs that come with this type of diagnosis -LRB- loss of work , travel , child care , bills -RRB- . All type of people buy critical illness insurance .
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
To buy critical illness insurance in California , visit a health insurance website to see if they offer it . Some life insurance agencies also carry critical illness insurance . Be sure to read carefully the conditions covered , what is excluded , and how much is paid in the event you are diagnosed with that illness , and compare features with a couple of policies to get your best one .
Critical illness policies cover as many as 15 or so different kinds of illness . Most critical illness plans pay a lump sum cash benefit on first diagnosis provided you meet the terms of the policy . In evaluating critical illness plans read and understand the definitions and make sure you buy a health based plan .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
Generally , critical illness insurance is not a taxable benefit . The money that is used to purchase critical illness insurance has already been taxed , since critical illness insurance is not tax exempt as a medical expense . Thus , the benefits paid if the critical illness policy pays out , are not taxable .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
Life insurance covers you in the event of death . Critical illness covers you while you are alive , providing cash to care for the extra expenses involved with a critical illness . Some life insurance policies offer a critical illness rider that will pay a portion of the death benefit while you are still alive . if you are diagnosed with a critical illness
This depends on the amount of money that you have saved to cover the costs associated with the immediate needs of a critical illness . If you have funds available to cover medical expenses of a critical illness , you may not need critical illness insurance . If you do not have the extra funds , than critical illness insurance can keep you from financial ruin .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Can You Borrow Money From Your Retirement Plan ?
Borrowing money from your retirement plan for emergencies can be helpful , but it shouldnt be used as a bank . Qualified retirement plans have their own regulatory rules of engagement for accessing plan participant money . Qualified plans charge interest , generally require repayment at employment termination or transfer of funds . If qualified pan money is deemed received it will trigger an ordinary income tax event and a 10 % penalty if youre under 59 . Non-qualified retirement plans that use a TAMRA compliant non modified endowment contract can borrow accumulated cash values at a low or no interest as the long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured .
Can you borrow money from your retirement plan ? Well , it 's going to depend on what type of plan you have . Some plans do allow for the request of borrowing from your account , but should you ? There are considerations to be made if this is something you are thinking about are issues like removing money from your account that could be earning a greater return than the rate you 're borrowing from . In other words you 're taking out money earning 8 % and paying it back at 4 % . Also if you separate employment the loan becomes a distribution and is considered taxable income with a possible early withdraw penalty .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
How much can I borrow from my retirement plan ? Now if I could flick your ear like your dad used to do , I would say `` why would you want to ? '' Just because a loan provision can be included within your plan , it does n't mean you should exhaust EVERY other possibility first . Borrowing from your retirement plan is far and away the last possible choice to make . That said ... The limits for loans can be set by your plan . Borrowing provisions can be set up by your plan . Payback interest rate is set up by your plan . Your plan advisory board will decide if a loan request has merits . Usually the money you take from your plan is no longer participating in plan returns , so if you 're investment is earning 10 % and your loan payback provision is 4 % , you 're making 4 % on your money . If you get laid off or quit your job , your loan from your retirement plan is `` called '' immediately . Failure to pay it back when called results in a `` premature distribution '' which makes your `` loan '' income , along with a penalty , so your income taxes could change considerably . Try to remember just because a feature is available , does n't mean you should use it .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
This is a pretty difficult question to answer in a forum like this . I highly recommend that you speak to a professionalone-on-one to completely evaluate your needs and to see if you can borrow - and if so , if it would be financially smart to borrow from a retirement fund . Feel free to contact me if you have no one else . To give you a little idea if you could however , here are some guidelines : Most retirement funds are NOT AVAILABLE to borrow from . If you have a Defined Benefit or a Cash Balance Benefit , you can not borrow from it . You can move your funds to a different account , with professional guidance to avoid penalties . But with these types of accounts , you usually can not touch until you retire . If you have a Profit Sharing account or a 401K - you MAY be able to borrow depending upon the rules of the company that it is through and/or the rules of the company you work for . Again , however , most will not allow you to borrow . If they do , typically you can only borrow 50 % of YOUR contributions -LRB- not what your company contributes -RRB- or $ 10k , whichever is less . Again , this is a very difficult and technical topic to get a solid answer here . Look me up if I can be of any further help .
Can you borrow from your retirement plan ? Well , it will depend on your plan as it has to be written into the plan design . The question becomes why would you ? When you borrow from your plan you are removing money from the earning stream of your retirement account . That money borrowed no longer earns a return until repaid .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Can you borrow money from a retirement plan ? It 's going to depend on the plan that you are participating in . Since the term borrowing is involved , I will assume this is about borrowing from a 401k plan . The ability and the reasons allowed for borrowing are set by both government and administration of the plan . The government has some straight forward situations where loans can be granted . What a retirement plan committee can do though is add acceptable reasons for loans . The question becomes even if loan provisions are offered , should you use this as a source of loans ? Only as a last resort . Even though you get to pay yourself back at low interest , you have removed money from your investment pool that could earn more than a low interest rate . So you could be losing money by doing this . Then if for any reason you separate employment the loan balance is immediately due . and could be considered a distribution subject to penalty . Last choice .
Can you borrow money from your retirement plan ? Well , it 's going to depend on what type of plan you have . Some plans do allow for the request of borrowing from your account , but should you ? There are considerations to be made if this is something you are thinking about are issues like removing money from your account that could be earning a greater return than the rate you 're borrowing from . In other words you 're taking out money earning 8 % and paying it back at 4 % . Also if you separate employment the loan becomes a distribution and is considered taxable income with a possible early withdraw penalty .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Borrowing against a 401k is both a yes and no answer as to debt . No it is not traditional debt as showing against your credit score or debt to earnings ratio , because you are borrowing your own money . It is debt as Jim mentioned , because it must be repaid within 9 months . The tax and penalty consequences are much worse than borrowing the money from a lender . It is never advised to borrow from your 401k because you are borrowing from your own future . A simple rule is if you need money today while you are able to earn an income , you will need money when you are old and sick and ca n't earn an income .
Borrowing money from your retirement plan for emergencies can be helpful , but it shouldnt be used as a bank . Qualified retirement plans have their own regulatory rules of engagement for accessing plan participant money . Qualified plans charge interest , generally require repayment at employment termination or transfer of funds . If qualified pan money is deemed received it will trigger an ordinary income tax event and a 10 % penalty if youre under 59 . Non-qualified retirement plans that use a TAMRA compliant non modified endowment contract can borrow accumulated cash values at a low or no interest as the long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured .
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 7144229616 . garylane@cox.net .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
annuities
What Does Suze Orman Think About Annuities ?
Over the years Suze has addressed annuities , not always in a favorable light . She has several online videos and content blogs and articles on annuities . Suze has a small treatise online entitled , Truth About Annuities , which outlines the product inventory in a pithy format that gives you her read on the subject .
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
This is another one of those should n't you ask Suze about ? Suze Orman believes in term insurance for the most part . Her background is as a stockbroker , not as an insurance agent . Her views are shaped by the industry she started in . After the MEC laws came about in the late 80 's , you could n't find many stockbrokers who recommended anything other than term insurance . Probably the biggest reason behind this recommendation was term insurance freed more money for investments which they got paid on , so it made perfect sense to encourage the purchase of term insurance as it freed short term money for investment . The problem is when your investments do n't earn 12 % every year and year after year , things may not work out the way you want . You may find you need life insurance longer than you thought . The real problem with following any financial guru , even if their advice is sound , is what happens when things go off path 10 % or 20 % ? Does the plan collapse ? Was all the investment return earned just you could pay a much higher premium in your old age because you bought term as a young person ? It 's an odd thing to think about in planning but simply ask what happens if you 're wrong ? How much damage hits you if you guessed wrong about the future ? This means taking a broader approach to planning , spreading risk and return to have things work out in different markets . A racing scull is faster than a rowboat , but when a wave hits and flips the racing scull over , but rocks the rowboat , which was a better choice for the body of water ?
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
Suze Orman seems to have softened her position on annuities . In the past she has be extremely critical of annuities . But recent postings on the Internet suggest she has modified her position if not her overall tone . Theres a piece on the Internet called Truth About Annuities , apparently authored by Suze , where she gives some latitude in their use in certain scenarios .
I do n't know or watch Suze Orman so I ca n't really state why she likes term life insurance over cash value life insurance . I do know that Suze Orman , Dave Ramsey and other talk radio types make blanket statements that do not suit every ones situation . The thing to remember their advice is free and you get what you pay for . Use a trusted independent advisor when purchasing life insurance to be sure you get the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
Term life insurance is a specific product for a specific need . Unlike various forms of permanent life insurance , term is designed to expire before you do . Term life insurance may be perfect for needs with a defined time limit . You can use it to cover debts such as a mortgage that is to be paid off in a specified number of years such as 15 or 30 years . Term life insurance could be used to satisfy a divorce decree where child support or even alimony -LRB- with a time limit -RRB- is required . Some business obligations are also situations where a term life insurance policy might be a good idea . But if you have a permanent need , such as for estate planning purposes -LRB- including estate liquidity -RRB- , term life insurance may not be your best choice . Suze Orman is not an agent , does not know you or your circumstances . She has no idea how much life insurance you should have any more than Jay Leno would . Suze Orman is not accountable by any means for poor advice she may offer regarding your insurance needs .
Suze Orman has a piece posted online called Truth About Annuities . About half way down the post she addresses variable annuities . Her explanation has a few mischaracterizations , but all in all she lays it out in an understandable manner . She seems to question the economics of tax deferral , but her treatment of variable annuities isnt as negative as some of her 2009 and 2010 YouTube videos . WEBSITELINK
Whether it 's Suze Orman or any of the other `` gurus '' that discuss life insurance for the majority of people , you must have a point of view that defines you with an audience . Orman is life a stopped watch , she is exactly right , but not all the time . The problem with other types of coverage is that many people spent money on whole life at the behest of an agent when that is not the appropriate type of coverage . Beware anyone that tells you what to purchase without knowing anything about your particular situation .
To say that Suze Orman is not a fan of participating whole life insurance for death benefit coverage is an understatement . She has several online videos castigating the product as a consumer rip off . For most people , Suze believes in term life insurance and investing the difference in price between the two products .
No , Suze Orman does not like variable annuities . She does like single premium deferred annuities , and sometimes likes medical annuities for older persons . However , she does not like variable annuities . She feels they are too complicated and that the fees are too high , among other things .
Suze Orman usually does not recommend Whole Life Insurance because she feels that Life Insurance is not needed in Retirement . In reality , most retirees have a need for at least a basic amount Life Insurance , if not more . And Term Insurance will eventually become unaffordable because of age . So most people at least have a small need for Whole Life Insurance , or some other type of Permanent Life Insurance .
Suze Orman recommends term life insurance over participating whole life insurance , which she has a disdain for . She as well as Dave Ramsey are huge proponents of term life insurance . And for financial liabilities that are time certain events , thats just fine . Generally you can only recommend what you understand . That in and of itself can eliminate your opining on an area you just dont understand .
`` No well-planned retirement should be without long term care -LRB- LTC -RRB- insurance . It is the very cornerstone of retirement security . '' - Suze Orman . Suze addresses LTC describes how to safeguard your financial future . This is one of the few areas Suze and the insurance industry agree on something .
Suze Orman is in favor or Term Life Insurance because it is a low cost way to provide a hefty amount of financial protection for a family . She advocates investing and saving on the side , so that your family need not be dependent on life insurance in your later years .
Suze Orman likes Term Life Insurance because it is a low cost way of protecting your family if you should die while they are dependent on your income . The product is easy to understand , is straightforward , and if you should die before the term is up , the death benefit is paid tax free to your beneficiaries .
Suze Orman says that Term Life Insurance is the only type of life insurance to buy . She recommends buying a length of term that suits the need for which it was purchased . E.g. . If protecting a child who is 13 , purchase a 10 year term policy . She says to buy 20 times the amount of annual income that your dependents would need to survive without you . That way they can invest the principal and live off the interest .
Suze Orman is against Whole Life insurance because she feels that people can do better by buying Term Life insurance and investing the rest . Technically , it is true that certain stocks or other investments will give a far better return on one 's dollar . But when one considers the risk and taxation on those types of investments , plus the fact that a large amount of medical expenses or just lack of self control might deplete one 's savings in the later years , buying Whole Life insurance can make sense for some people . No cookie cutter approach fits everyone .
Clark Howard goes along with the general theory that you need 10 to 20 times your income with term life insurance . Most radio personalities that give financial advice have to be very generic and not deal with specifics or they would bore everyone to death . Suze Orman , Clark Howard and Dave Ramsey are all popular personalities that agree on this point .
That is a great question ! I did n't think she liked much of anything , except big piles of cash ! -LRB- I 'm joking , of course -RRB- My guess is that she likes it for the same reason that Dave Ramsey does - it 's cheaper than whole life , if you need to purchase life insurance at all . In their worlds , -LRB- think middle to upper middle class and higher -RRB- , you should purchase term life insurance , save or invest the difference of what your whole life would have cost , and hope that you die within the term period . Some people are able to do that , and so the financial guru 's smell like roses with their good advice . I hope that helps , -LRB- and no offense meant , Mr. Ramsey or Ms. Orman -RRB- , thanks for asking !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is hypnotherapy to control urinary incontinence from radiation treatment medicare covered ?
Hypnotherapy would not be covered by Medicare to help control urinary incontinence . There maybe some mental health issues where Medicare will pay some of the cost for hypnotherapy but I do n't believe it will cover any of the cost for the problem you are having .
Hypnosis is not a covered benefit under Original Medicare . Having a Medicare supplement will not help either as Medicare Supplements will only cover services that Medicare approves . It would be theoretically possible there are some Medicare Advantage carriers that will cover Hypnotherapy but non of the more well know ones such as BCBS , United , Aetna , Humana will cover it .
Hypnosis may be covered by health insurance , but it varies by the policy and each situation . BlueCross BlueShield considers hypnosis medically necessary for relief of acute or chronic pain or as an adjunct to psychotherapy , but this definition is dependent to the state in which you live . Contact your current health provider for more information .
Hypnotherapy would not be covered by Medicare to help control urinary incontinence . There maybe some mental health issues where Medicare will pay some of the cost for hypnotherapy but I do n't believe it will cover any of the cost for the problem you are having .
As a general rule , Medicare does not cover hypnotherapy . If your doctor or therapist recommends hypnosis for weight loss or smoking cessation , the treatment is not covered . But in some cases Medicare can pay for hypnotherapy . If hypnosis is used in conjunction with treatment for PTSD or pain management it may be a covered expense .
UTI -LRB- urinary tract infection -RRB- is a covered expense under Medicare . If you can PROVE you contracted the illness as a result of hospital care , and the hospital agrees to cover all costs associated with your care , this may be considered an ineligible claim under Medicare . Otherwise , UTI treatment is covered .
Medicare can pay for hypnotherapy for a medical condition -LRB- such as intense and chronic pain -RRB- or a psychological condition -LRB- such as post traumatic stress disorder -RRB- that requires that type of treatment as a medical necessity . Normally , Medicare does not pay for hypnotherapy , even if prescribed as a method to help quit smoking .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not cover adult incontinence diapers and bed liners used at home because they are thrown away after each use , and not considered Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . If hospitalized or in a skilled nursing facility , Medicare will pay for incontinence diapers under Part A. Medicare will cover catheters .
Medicare does not usually cover tooth extractions . There are some exceptions , including extractions done to prepare for radiation treatment , extractions done as part of treatment for disease or reconstruction from an accident , or possibly extractions involving bones of the jaw and mouth . In these cases , Medicare Part B may cover the extraction .
Unfortunately , Medigap does not cover routine dental examinations . Although Medigap Plans are designed to fill the gaps in Original Medicare , they will only pay for Medicare-covered services . Routine dental care is not covered under Original Medicare ; therefore , it is also not covered by Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- . Medicare will only pay for dental services that are an integral part of a Medicare covered procedure . Some exceptions include , reconstruction of the jaw following accidental injury , or extractions done in preparation for radiation treatment involving the jaw . Medicare Beneficiaries often purchase a separate dental plan to meet their individual needs . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Medicare does not normally pay for gum surgery , dentures , fillings , exams , or other dental procedures . The only type of oral treatment that Medicare covers is surgery to reconstruct a jaw , preparation of the mouth for radiation or chemo treatments , or other procedures that are connected to a general health condition .
In most situations , Medicare does not cover items that are cosmetic in nature , but there are a few exceptions . Medicare recognizes that part of the healing process and recovery from cancer radiation treatment is the need for the patient to feel normal again . If hair loss is due to cancer therapy , Medicare will usually cover at least some of the cost of a wig .
Hypnosis is not a covered benefit under Original Medicare . Having a Medicare supplement will not help either as Medicare Supplements will only cover services that Medicare approves . It would be theoretically possible there are some Medicare Advantage carriers that will cover Hypnotherapy but non of the more well know ones such as BCBS , United , Aetna , Humana will cover it .
Original Medicare does not pay for dental work that is part of routine care of the teeth , such as exam , cleanings , fluoride treatments , or fillings . It also will not pay for dentures . Some Medicare Supplement plans will cover some dental work . Medicare will cover oral work that done to protect or treat the patient 's general health , or to prepare the patient for surgery , radiation , etc that will be performed for a health condition . It will also cover jaw surgery for a broken jaw , or follow up to an infection after an extraction . If the dental patient has a life threatening condition , Medicare may pay for the cost of hospitalization but not the dental work itself .
As Peggy indicated , Medicare Part B does not cover incontinence diapers . This means there are no discounts , even if you purchase from a Medicare approved DME provider that accepts assignment . Many retailers such as Target and Walmart will carrier adult diapers and have good pricing . You should also consider warehouse clubs such as Costco and Sams as well as online retailers including Amazon .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for incontinence supplies such as adult diapers and bed pads . If the insured person is in a hospital or skilled nursing facility , those items will be covered under Medicare Part A.Otherwise , Part B will not cover them due them not being classified as durable medical equipment .
Medicare does n't cover regular tooth extractions . It will cover some dental procedures do to an accidental injury or extractions done in preparation for radiation treatment for a diseased jaw .
Medicare Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , care in a skilled nursing facility , hospice care , and some home health care . If you have paid Social Security taxes for at least 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- this coverage is free . Part B of Medicare covers doctor office visits , preventive care , diagnostic tests , physical therapy , hospital outpatient services , radiation and chemotherapy treatments , kidney dialysis , durable medical equipment , ambulance services and some home health care . You pay a monthly premium to the Federal government for this coverage .
The type of cancers that are covered by a critical illness policy depends on the policy stipulations . However , cancer that is non-invasive -LRB- such as skin cancer -RRB- or at a very low stage , is the type of cancer that is normally excluded from Critical Illness policies . They generally cover cancer that needs treatment such as surgery , chemotherapy or radiation .
While trying to purchase a life insurance policy with a history of cancer can prove challenging , even if the cancer has been effectively treated and eliminated , it is possible in fact possible to get term life insurance with a cancer history . The rates for a life insurance policy is determined by the risk classification you qualify for . For example , a person who qualifies for a standard risk class would be viewed as having a normal life expectancy , while someone who only qualifies for a substandard rate -LRB- also known as a table rating and designated with letters A-J or 1-10 -RRB- is considered to have a shorter than normal life expectancy . Since the life expectancy would be considered shorter for someone with a history of cancer , a table rating may be assigned and a higher premium charged . Every life insurance company has their own underwriting guidelines so some companies may respond with a more favorable risk class offer than others even though they 're based on the same exact medical profile . There are several key items that insurance companies will look at to determine the risk classification assigned for your policy . Some of those items include : 1 -RRB- Type of cancer - colon cancer , breast cancer , lung cancer , prostate cancer , melanoma , ovarian cancer , skin cancer , or other internal cancers . 2 -RRB- Stage of cancer - Stage 0 , Stage 1 , Stage 2 , Stage 3 , or Stage 4 . Stage 0 is carcinoma in situ and means the cancer likely has not spread to other organs . Stages 1 , 2 , and 3 indicate more extensive disease with larger tumors or spreading . In Stage 4 , the cancer has spread to other organs and life expectancy is usually very short . 3 -RRB- If there was melanoma only , the `` Clark Level '' would be considered the same way the above stages are . 4 -RRB- Course of treatment how was the cancer treated ? Did you go through chemotherapy or radiation ? Surgery only ? Immunotherapy ? Bone marrow transplant ? something else ? 5 -RRB- How long since the treatment was completed/last date of treatment ? - cancer that was found and treated 5 or more years ago will be seen more favorably than cancer diagnosed only 1-2 years ago . The longer it 's been since the cancer was treated/eliminated/went into remission , the less likely it is considered to come back . 6 -RRB- Have you been treated/are being treated for any other health conditions such as heart disease , diabetes , high blood pressure , high cholesterol , abnormal lab test results , etc. . The best way to obtain term life insurance with medical history including cancer is with the help of an independent life insurance agent that represents many of the top insurance companies . They will be able to shop your full medical history for the best possible offer before applying for a policy . That way , you know what the most likely outcome will be before ever starting the process of filling out formal paperwork and taking an exam . Not only that , but there are no charges or fees for using the help of an agent -LRB- agents are paid by the insurance companies -RRB- . The insurance cost is exactly the same as if purchasing directly from the company . By law , the insurance company can not charge you less for applying directly . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including shopping the case , providing quotes , and comparing options , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Why Is 401K Taxed ?
A 401 -LRB- K -RRB- defined contribution plan is a tax DEFERRED program instituted by your employer . Contributions by you to the plan are normally tax deferred , meaning that there isnt any current income tax on that portion of your income . -RRB- The same is true if your employer makes a contribution . When the funds are withdrawn they are taxable as ordinary income under most circumstances . A distribution before you reach age 50.5 could incur an additional 10 % penalty tax .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 591/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
Why roll over a 401k into a Roth IRA ? Well I ca n't honestly think of a good answer to do this . In order to do this transfer , if you qualify for a Roth in the first place , would require you to cash out your 401k and combined with your current income , might place you in a higher tax bracket , as well as the extra 10 % penalty for early redemption , and possible redemption fees from the 401k as well . So you might be looking at a `` loss '' of anywhere from 35-45 % of the value of your 401k just from taxes and early redemption penalties . What you would have to figure is how many years would it take you to get back to even ? That would include this loss and the loss of gain years spent getting back to even . How about if you qualify , owning both ? Use new money for your Roth . Yes , it will be taxed , but it wo n't be taxed , penalized and require years to recover the market loss . Have both .
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
How is a Roth better than a 401k ? Well it 's not a matter of better , it 's a matter of different . Both a Roth and 401k give you tax deferred savings , they just differ on when taxes are applied . A 401k allows contributions to go in pre-tax and grow tax deferred . When those funds are withdrawn they are income and subject to taxes in what ever bracket you 're in . A Roth does the opposite , you pay taxes on your contribution and it grows tax deferred , then distributions from your Roth are done without any tax implication . So the question of one over the other is do you think taxes will be higher or lower when you begin to withdraw funds ?
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
Can you rollover your 401k to a roth ira ? Not really no , there is no provision that allows you to roll the values in your 401k into a Roth without tax penalties . If you did something like this you would need to cash out your 401k which would be taxed at an income tax level combined with your current income , along with a 10 % penalty . So you would be losing roughly 40 % or more of you 401k values . Not something easily made up no matter how good an investment picker you might be .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
That is a great question ! If you can afford to contribute to both your Roth IRA and your 401k , then by all means do so ! What a great way to provide for your retirement . You can contribute $ 5500 per year -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- to your Roth , and $ 17,500 in your 401k . Ideally , you contribute the max to your 401k , especially if your employer matches , and then fund your Roth , to ensure that you have some tax free income to balance the taxed income from the 401k . What a great question ! Thanks for asking !
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
When you ask which life insurance is best in Illinois there are a lot of thing to consider . First of all why are you buying the policy ? Are you buying it to pay your house off if you die , to pay for a funeral , to leave your family with extra money to help them re-adjust their life after you die or are you buying it as a retirement vehicle to replace your 401K . When you figure outthe why , then we can start to narrow down which company has that type of insurance to meet your needs . My years of experience has taught methat there is no one company that can meet all the individual needs of every person . I always look at the WHY first , then I can educate you on the different companies that could fit your needs . If you need more help feel free to Skype me or call 630-918-1673
That is a great question ! I 'd need to know a little more information about why you want to withdraw or close it out , before I 'd feel comfortable telling you to do it . There are very large penalties for early withdrawals from your 401k , and if you are counting on a certain amount , unless you are in your 60 's , please count on that amount being reduced by about a third , after taxes and penalties . 401k money looks good , but taking it out for something other than its intended use is costly . If you would like to proceed anyway , contact your plan administrator , and they will give you the forms to fill out . I can not say strongly enough to speak with an advisor before doing this , for any reason other than starting your retirement income . Thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! Simply put , a 401k rollover is what you call the action of taking the funds from one 401k and moving them -LRB- or `` rolling them over '' -RRB- into another 401k fund , or similar retirement vehicle . This has to be done in a very timely fashion , or there are tax consequences , and is most commonly done when you switch employers , and want to keep funding the 401k . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! When you make contributions to your Roth IRA , those contributions are made after you are taxed on them . When you make contributions to your companies 401k , for example , those contributions are subtracted from your income before the remainder of the income is taxed . Since Uncle Sam did n't get his slice of tax on your 401k money , he takes it when you make your withdrawals . In your Roth 's case , you 've already paid him , so your Roth withdrawals are not taxed . So your contributions , -LRB- up to $ 5500 , $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- are made after tax -LRB- and can not be deducted on your income tax forms -RRB- , and your withdrawals tax free , as long as they meet the 5 year , or 591/2 year old rule . If you withdraw more than what you 've paid in before that time , the gains are taxable , so be careful . I hope that clears it up for you , if not , please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it . Thanks for asking !
Your 401k will be taxed at the same tax rate as your salary is or was taxed at unless the income from your 401k falls below what your salary used to be and that positions you in a lower tax bracket . In that case , your tax would be less because your income would be less .
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
Yes , you can contribute to a 401k and IRA in the same year . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , it might be a good strategy to put in enough to qualify for the full employer match before contributing to an IRA . There are income qualifying rules for the traditional IRA . For married filing jointly or qualifying widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- is less than $ 181,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 181,000 and $ 191,000 your contribution amount is reduced . For single , head of household or married filing separately and you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year , if your MAGI is less that $ 114,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 114,000 and $ 129,000 your contribution amount is reduced . Traditional IRAs have a maximum age contribution limit of 70 and you must begin Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turned age 70 . Roth IRAs have no age limits for contribution and have no RMD at age 70 . This could mean you have two RMDs in the same year . If you or your spouse participates in an employer sponsored retirement plan such as a 401k , the ability to deduct a contribution to a traditional IRA hinges on what your MAGI is on your tax return along with your filing status . There are some rather complicated formulas that relate to this and you should definitely seek advice from your tax preparer on anything tax related . As always , you should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
You do n't want to close your 401k due to the fact you will be taxed on the income that it generated . The best way is to roll the 401k over so you can take the interest earned tax free there are several ways to do this you need to consult a financial planner and look at somethings this money you save now tax free will be needed much more in retirement due to taxes and inflation .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Apply For Health Insurance ?
You can apply through the healthcare.gov website . However , I STRONGLY urge you to apply for your coverage through an independent health insurance broker to make sure your application is processed and your policy placed in force properly - especially considering all of the issues the healthcare.gov website has had in it 's first year under the affordable care act . A health insurance broker broker can help you compare the plans and work with you on a personal level to help determine which health plan will be most suitable to your specific needs and budget . Please note , you can only apply for health insurance during the annual open enrollment period unless you have a qualifying event for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. getting married , having a baby , coming off of group coverage , etc. -RRB-
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
How you qualify for term life insurance depends on the type of policy you apply for . If you apply for a guaranteed issue policy , you only have to be within an age range and apply for an allowable face amount . If you apply for simplified life insurance , you usually need to answer a limited number of health questions and do a phone interview . With a medically underwritten policy , you must pass a free life insurance exam . The underwriter may also review your medical records to determine if you fit the health guidelines to get that type of policy .
To answer the question of how to apply for life insurance , I would need to know the type of policy for which you are applying . 1 -RRB- Medically Underwritten This is the type of policy that requires some type of exam , and possibly the life insurance company will order your medical records . Applying for this type of policy requires that a fairly lengthy application be completed . It may be filled out on paper , digitally or over the phone . You might do it with your agent , with your paramed examiner , on your own , or with a representative of the insurance company . Once everything is collected by the underwriter , the company decides what to rate you , and you generally accept the policy by paying the first premium . Because there are so many different types of medically underwritten policies , there are a number of variations on how to apply for them . 2 -RRB- Simplified Issue Simplified Issue policies do not require an exam . Some never require medical records , while others order medical records as needed . Filling out the applications for simplified issue life insurance has about as many choices as medically underwritten applications . However , these policies tend to go into effect much more quickly , and it is often their practice to draft the first premium as soon as you apply or are approved . 3 -RRB- Guaranteed Issue Guaranteed Issue Life Insurance does not ask any health questions and has no medical requirements at all . It does not usually entail a phone interview , although applications are usually done face to face with an agent . Generally , these policies are graded and should go into effect within days .
In 2014 and beyond , under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act , individual & fully insured small to medium sized group health insurance plans will have to fall within four categories referred to as Bronze , Silver , Gold and Platinum . These categories represent an actuarial valuation of how much financial exposure the policyholder has up to a maximum out-of-pocket financial exposure of $ 6350 . It is a gross over simplification but for the average health insurance consumer , the closest I can come to explaining these `` Metallic '' plan categories is that Bronze represents 60 % coverage , Silver equals 70 % coverage , Gold equals 80 % coverage and Platinum equals 90 % coverage . All of these plans , by law , must be guaranteed to be issued by the insurance carrier , can not be subject to underwriting and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately with no lifetime limits on coverage . In addition , all plans must cover what are referred to as the Minimum Essential Benefits . These requirements range from covering a wide range of preventive care services at 100 % , coverage for maternity , mental health & substance abuse along with a variety of other services including pediatric dental & vision to even educating women on how to nurse their babies -LRB- how the human race survived for thousands of yearswithout the government providing for such training is a mystery to me -RRB- . Unfortunately , there really are no simple andconcise ways to explain health insurance plans . Different state regulations also apply and each insurance carrier can design health insurance plans that fall within these four different `` Metallic '' categories that can vary widely in their appearance . To make an informed choice for your health insurance as an individual or a business it is more important than ever that you seek out the advice of an experienced health insurance broker/consultant who understands the intricacies of the health insurance plans options and their associated costs that are available to you in your specific area .
To buy term life insurance , you must first determine how much you need , how long you want the term to last , and how much you have to spend . It can be helpful to shop websites that offer quotes right online , then talk to an agent to determine if you qualify for those rates . Agencies that carry a number of choices can find you the best prices for your age , build and health . If you are applying for a medically underwritten policy , the next step will be to apply , then take a free life insurance exam in your home , or other location of your choice . Once the underwriting process is complete , you will find out if you are approved , and your rate . If you are applying for a No Exam policy , you may be able to put it in place in as little as 24 hours . Most take longer . Term insurance is very straightforward and there is a lot of competition . With an ethical agent , you should have no trouble getting a policy that you like .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
Medicare Part D , where do I apply ? What is the doughnut hole and how does it work ? How much does Medicare Part D cost ? Can I sign up for Part D at any time ? Which plan is the best one for me ? All good questions . The answer to where do you apply is this . You can apply through Medicare.gov You can sign up direct through a carrier Or you can find a good local insurance agent that specializes in Medicare plans
To apply for Medicare Part B online , you can go to the website medicare.gov . There you will find explanations about what to apply for , when to apply , and how to apply for it . Then you will be directed to an online form that you can use to submit your application electronically .
Well , of course you can , you can lie about virtually anything . The question should be is it ethical to lie about smoking for health insurance ? I suspect that in your heart you know the answer to that question is `` No . '' I presume you are asking this question in regard to the smoker 's penalty that can be applied to individual health insurance rates and that some employer 's utilize . At this time individual health plans are not requiring a screening test to determine if someone is a tobacco user and are relying on the honor system for applicants to self-report their usage . There are some employers that take a more strict approach to this matter and may screen you if they require a pre-employment physical . To be clear , if you are a tobacco user and you apply for health insurance asserting that you are not then you are engaging in fraud . Technically this could result in policy termination but my current understanding is that if the fraud is uncovered then the individual policyholder will be back billed at the tobacco user rate and expected to pay all the extra premium due . However , just because the Affordable Care Act allows for a tobacco use premium penalty does not mean that the health insurance carriers are compelled to apply it . So , you have some carriers that for administrative purposes at this time who are n't bothering with applying the tobacco use penalty and others who are . I would inquire with your insurance broker or the insurance carriers you are considering as to what their current rating approach is to tobacco use . In the employer setting the penalties could be more severe depending upon what their personnel policies are . Honesty is the best policy .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
It used to mean that for an individual applying for individual health insurance or for an employer group applying for group health insurance that the individual or the employees would have to answer medical questions and perhaps provide rather detailed information on any pre-existing health conditions that they or their dependents to be covered might have . This has essentially become a non-issue in the fully insured individual or group health insurance markets after January 1 , 2o14 as the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- no longer allows for the underwriting of such health insurance policies . Underwriting may still be encountered in the group health insurance market if an employer has or is implementing a self-funded health insurance plan . As these plans are subject to the Federal ERISA guidelines asking medical questions and adjusting a group 's rates for the medical risk -LRB- s -RRB- in the group is still allowed .
Yes . DUIs can greatly affect your the risk class you can qualify for in life inurance . A history of being charged with driving under the influence -LRB- DUI -RRB- or driving while intoxicated -LRB- DWI -RRB- one or more times can make it difficult to obtain the life insurance coverage you need at an affordable rate . The ratings that life insurance companies will assign for people with history of DUI vary substantially between companies and the difference could cost you thousands of dollars . Whether applying for a fully underwritten or non-medical life insurance policy , the carriers will want to know the input regarding a number of questions -LRB- typically you would fill out a DUI questionnaire form with the application -RRB- to make an accurate risk assessment : 1 -RRB- How many times have you been charged with DUI/DWI ? 2 -RRB- When was the most recent charge ? 3 -RRB- Are you currently on probation ? 4 -RRB- Has your license been revoked or suspended one or more times ? 5 -RRB- Have you been cited for any other traffic offenses ? 6 -RRB- Have you sought treatment for alcohol abuse at a rehab facility or attended meetings with support groups like Alcoholics Anonymous ? 7 -RRB- Are you still drinking , or have you quit completely ? The most likely offer you receive , depending on how long it 's been since the DUI , will either require a table rating and/or a flat extra rating . A table rating is an additional percentage charged on top of the standard premium . As an example , a Table D/Table 4 is generally about two times the standard premium . A flat extra rating is an additional cost per thousand dollars of coverage , such as $ 2.50 per thousand . Another example would be a $ 1,000,000 policy with a flat extra of $ 2.50 per thousand would require additional premium of $ 2,500 in addition of the standard rate , regardless of how many years the policy is guaranteed . If you have a history of DUI or DWI in your records , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time . The more companies that give you a table rating , flat extra rating , or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer . Your best option is to consult with an experienced life insurance broker before applying for any coverage . We can shop the case for you among multiple carriers to get an understanding of the risk class carriers will likely assign for your coverage - this will point you in the direction of who is the most appropriate carrier to apply for coverage with . The risk class is the most critical item for coverage because it determines the premiums . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
If you are referring to true major medical insurance policies that are in compliance with the requirements of the health care reform law then the answer to your question is `` Yes '' . Now , how the particular health insurance policy you select actually covers doctor 's office visits will vary between both insurance plans offered by an insurance carrier and from one insurance carrier to another . You could have a plan with office visit copayments that apply immediately , office visits could be covered at the plan 's co-insurance level with no deductible applying , or all health care services , including doctor 's office visits , could be subject to the plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , the consumer 's experience could range from a copay of perhaps $ 20 for the office visit to paying 100 % of the costs if it is subject to the plan 's deductible . The bottom line is to do your homework and study the coverage details of the health insurance plan you are enrolling in . There is much more to consider about a health insurance policy than just its monthly premium cost .
A health insurance rate is the total amount in dollars that an insurance company would charge you on a monthly basis for a particular set of health benefits . For example , it could be $ 175 or $ 400 per month , the number is a function of several factors but it simply translates the annual estimated cost & risk for providing health services and taking on the risk of future health problems or accidents you might have and gives you that figure on a monthly basis . In the era of government health insurance marketplaces and the role of advanced premium tax subsidies in helping persons purchase individual health insurance , be advised that depending upon you and your family 's income level you could qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium costs and in some cases also qualify for reduced deductible and out-of-pocket expense exposure . If you are in this income range -LRB- and no small number of Americans fall somewhere within the subsidy income ranges -RRB- then the monthly premium most prominently displayed is the reduced premium you pay each month after your subsidy payment had been applied . In this context you are not paying the full premium for your health insurance and are being subsidized for some , in some cases all , amount of the true total premium cost of your health insurance plan . You will also want to look at your cost of insurance before any subsidy was applied so that this consumer understands the true total cost of the plan they selected .
When you apply for a life insurance policy , the life insurance company will nearly always check your driving record , pharmacy record , and MIB , even if you are applying for a policy that does not require a life insurance exam . They are checking for a suspended license , numerous traffic tickets , DUI 's , medications , and past health conditions the showed up when you applied for insurance in the past . If you are required to take a life insurance exam , they will check your blood and urine for HIV , diabetes , cholesterol , liver disease , other health conditions , and the presence of nicotine or drug metabolites . They will also weigh and measure you , take your blood pressure and pulse , and depending on your age and amount you apply for , may check for heart disease through use of a resting EKG or stress test .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Do People Buy Whole Life Insurance ?
There are many reasons why people buy whole life insurance . The main reason is permanence , it last until you are at least age 100 and sometimes beyond . Where as term insurance is only for a set number of years . Another reason is that whole life policies will typically build a cash value that could be borrowed against in most situations . There are too many reasons to list here . I would recommend contacting your local agent to have them help you finding the policy right for your needs and goals .
Generally speaking some reasons are : -LRB- 1 -RRB- The earlier you purchase , the lower the premium locked at a rate until age 100-121 depending on the policy . -LRB- 2 -RRB- The potential to build a cash value which can be borrowed against in most cases . -LRB- 3 -RRB- It is permanent compared to term insurance that is only for a determined number of years .
People buy whole life insurance because their insurance professional recommends it . But should they ? Whole life insurance for supplemental retirement income may be appropriate for long term conservative savers , who also desire tax advantaged features of tax deferral and the potential for tax free income provided that the policy is kept in force for the life if the insured . But whole life insurance for protection may not be the most economical approach for permanent coverage . Guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- is less expensive and although most GULs have little to no cash value , theyre purchase for the lowest cost of coverage .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
When is not necessarily the best question to ask as to why to buy whole life insurance . If you know why you are purchasing insurance , that will help to determine your when . Most whole life policies pay out very little in dividends so I would look at other vehicles if you want dividends . Also , life insurance isa tax free vehicle when it pays out so consider that when you are looking at life insurance . To get to the root of the answer , most people purchase Whole Life policies as final expense policies because there is n't much of a reason to purchase Whole Life policies otherwise . The interest rate is dismal , dividends are not worth mentioning . The cost of a whole life policy can be affordable as to building up the savings or investment vehicle versus on your own . So , I would not purchase a whole life policy prior to age 50 .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Why invest in whole life insurance ? Well it is one of the few insurance products that you actually control , not the insurance carrier . That is a big reason why whole life insurance is expensive compared to other life products . The insurance company bears the risk of the contract as they can not alter or change the terms of the contract , they can not raise the price of the policy in later years and must receive the policy owners permission to do anything to the policy . What a whole life offers is a decent return for the safety it provides the policy holder . There is very little investment risk to a whole life policy compared to other places where a person can put money . This also is reflected in the return . If you had money invested in 2008 you learned first hand about investment risk . That said , while the rest of my investments were losing 40 % my whole life gained value . You ca n't go backwards with a whole life which makes it a good part of anybody 's planning . I call whole life the most boring investment a person can make . Why ? it does what it says it will do .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
Good question ! And there are lots of god reasons why wealthy people buy life insurance . And not just any life insurance , but typically WHole Life insurance . As mentioned above here wealthy people are usually concerned with estate preservation and estates worth over $ 5.6 million incur huge taxation at the death of the owner of the estate . So one reason is to pay the death tax on the estate . Also as mentioned above whole life insurance grows cash value tax-free or at least tax-deferred . And the growth is guaranteed , and with Mutual insurance companies dividends are also paid . And buying whole life insurance is like buying money at a discount with the possibility of considerable wealth growth . And of course the death benefit is paid to the beneficiary tax-free !
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Why buy whole life for a child ? Well I guess I can tell you why I bought whole life for my kids . In no particular order or rank , I bought whole life because that is the cheapest if will ever be , those policies will become cornerstones of their financial lives . Much like buying a piece of property they now have something to build on . They have future guaranteed insurability with these policies as well What that means is they ca n't be told `` no '' by the insurance company , even if they are no longer insurable . Sort of like a stock option . And finally for this post if either of my kids were to die before me I would be devastated . I would be crushed as I have great kids . So insurance on them would help me get through their passing by paying bills that still need to be paid . I am planning for their future living with these policies and accepting the aspect of the possibility of their early passing and the help they would provide . I could never imagine having an argument with a spouse over what headstone to buy . Whole life on a child is an investment in their future , not just their death .
Is Whole life insurance worth buying ? Well the answer is going to vary by the individual as people see worth differently . To me a decades old owner of whole life , all I can do is tell you why I purchased whole life . I liked the idea of owning the policy with a set price that can not be changed . I liked the terms of ownership did n't or could n't be changed over time . I like the steady boring returns to cash values that these policies produced . While my real estate , stock market and other investments have gone up and down , in many cases very dramatically , my boring whole life has done what it said it would . My whole life has NEVER gone backwards in value , it grows in good markets and bad ones . Is whole life the only thing you should purchase , well no . A good portfolio is a diverse portfolio . Whole life should be a part of it , but not all of it . Owning a whole life allows you to take risks elsewhere as you have a safety net .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Is A Renters Insurance For Apartments ?
Based on my experience and within my geographic area ; I have seen renters insurance cost as little as $ 7/mo . Renters insurance rates could vary greatly depending upon the carrier , coverage , and other factors used to determine the rate . Renters insurance is a very low cost type of insurance for the coverages provided to the insured in the event of a loss .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Yes an apartment complex can require you to obtain renters insurance as a condition of renting their apartment . What apartments are concerned about is liability protection . Should the tenant be liable for bodily injury or property damage the apartment complex does not want to be the first in line to be sued for something the tenant caused . Instead the tenants renters insurance policy will defend against the loss first . The apartment complex will not care if you chose to carry coverage for your own personal property . Also on a side note if the tenant did not carry renters insurance and was sued for a loss , just because the apartment complex may have to defend does not give a free pass to the tenant . Your still going to court and it can cost you thousands . Renters insurance is very inexpensive and covers you for so much . Buy it .
Why some apartments require renters insurance can vary . First , lets cover what renters insurance covers . It covers your personal property , your liability and medical expenses . Second , your liability and medical coverage are the parts that are most important to the apartment . This is because your liability insurance can be used to cover damage done to the building due to your negligence . For example , lets say you leave the stove on and you leave your apartment . Lets further say it starts a fire and causes damage to the building . The apartment 's insurance will pay for the damages , but then it will subrogate against your insurance -LRB- meaning it will make a claim against your renters coverage -RRB- . Therefore , many apartment complexes ' insurance companies will require that all the tenants have a renters policy so it can recoup any of its losses caused by the apartment complex 's tenants .
Renters insurance is a must have for everyone who rents a home or apartment and it 's very inexpensive . Renters insurance typically cost between $ 100 - $ 200 per year depending on how much personal property coverage you need . Renters insurance will cover your belongings and provide liability coverage . Renters insurance even covers personal property away from your home or apartment . For example , someone breaks into your car and steels your iPad . Most policies limit coverage away from your residence premise to 10 % but the example would be a covered loss .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
Renter insurance makes a lot of sense . If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle . Yes it makes sense to buy renters insurance .
The average cost is much lower than you might think . People living in apartments in Fresno , California can buy a renters policy for less than $ 10 per month . That will provide around $ 20,000 of protection for personal property and $ 300,000 for liability protection in the event of personal injury and property damage . The policies are transferrable when you move from apartment to apartment and many companies will discount a homeowners policy when you have had a renters policy with them .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
Great question ! The purpose of renters insurance is to protect you , in the event that your belongings are damaged , destroyed , or stolen . Let 's say your apartment catches on fire . The landlords insurance pays for the building your apartment is in , and your renters insurance pays for your things inside the apartment when it was destroyed . Without the renters insurance , you are at a loss to replace those things , as the landlords insurance wo n't . It is a good thing to have , especially if you do not have the money to start all over replacing everything that you had owned . If you have more questions , I 'll be happy to help , feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
To help the tenant and themselves . If the apartment building experiencs a fire or tornado and the tenant losses everything . Without renters insurance how does the tenant replace the things lost and pay for another place to live ? Renters insurance also helps protect the renter against financial harship if someone should be injured while in their apartment and other covered situations . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand what coverage is provided and what exclusions ther may be .
You need renters insurance when you have something to loose . That something could be more than your stuff . It could be the reasonable rent you have . If there were a fire , and you had to leave for another apartment , you might have to pay more rent . LOSS OF USE is a coverage built in to the policy . If you have to leave your 2 bedroom , second floor apartment where you pay $ 500 a month because of a fire , you can move into a similar apartment and if that similar apartment cost more , LOSS OF USE will pay for the extra -LRB- above $ 500 -RRB- rent . It will not pay for you to move into a four bedroom penthouse apartment . That 's not similar . If a friend or someone else visits , goes to the bathroom and slips on the floor they could get injured ... badly . A renters policy includes two important coverages : MEDICAL PAYMENTS and BODILY INJURY LIABILITY . MEDICAL PAYMENTS would pay hospital or doctor expenses necessary to treat your friend . The limit is usually $ 1,000 but you can buy more and it 's cheap . If your friend gets a lawyer and sues you , BODILY INJURY LIABILIYT will pay for an attorney to defend you AND pay the damages if you lose . The limits generally start at $ 100,000 , but check the price for higher limits as it also is cheap . Finally , there is your stuff . Maybe it 's used and worn and you do n't think it 's worth a lot . But if you had to go out and buy EVERYTHING all over again , it would be expensive . You can buy insurance that will replace your old stuff with new stuff . You just have to make sure you have REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE . REMEMBER : Insurance does not cover everything for every imaginable kind of claim . There are limits and exclusions . They are generally the same from company to company . Find an agent you can talk to and ask questions . Good Luck Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers 877-414-2031 WEBSITELINK
That is a great question ! The answer to your question is pretty simple - the one that gives you the most coverage for the least price . There are many good companies out there that have very similar renter 's policies , so it really comes down to which one in your area provides the most coverage for the least cost . Ask for `` replacement cost '' coverage , and have a very detailed list of everything that will go into your apartment - serial/model numbers and pictures of all electronics , and pictures and count sheets of everything else . Use a value calculator -LRB- most renters insurance companies will have one on their site , I happen to like Liberty Mutual 's , as it is simple , and quotes your price as you go -RRB- to help you get an idea of the value of your stuff , and the amount of coverage needed . Since the cost of coverage will vary greatly from neighborhood to neighborhood , and even apartment building to apartment building , it 's hard to give you a company name to look at . Most apartment complexes can refer you to a preferred insurer , Thank you for asking !
A renters policy provides coverage for damage that is the result of a covered peril . Since there is a wide variety of forms this can not be answered for every case , however , most policies list windstorm or hail right after fire and lightning . These are the fundamental coverages contained in most policies . The coverage has some limitations . The company will normally not pay for loss to property inside a structure , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water , all whether driven by wind or not , which enter through an opening not made by the direct force of wind or hail . The company is not likely to pay for the loss to watercraft and their trailers unless inside a fully enclosed building . Smaller water craft normally have coverage . If your property damage is subject to ordinance or law , such as a connection for an appliance , there might be a limitation on the increased cost of replacement that comes because of that law or ordinance . If the hurricane causes landslides or erosion , damage to your personal property arising from that movement of land might not be covered either . The same is true if the damage comes from flood water or tidal waves . This exclusion applies whether it is caused by wind or not . If the hurricane interrupts power supply the insurance company probably will deny coverage on any loss that result from that cause , for example rotting food in a freezer . If you are running a business out of your apartment , the company will probably exclude any loss that comes from that business to include interruption because there isnt power or people can not reach your apartment . The chances are quite good that if a hurricane strikes your apartment , that your renters policy will replace your property up to the limits of the policy . This is when you find out how good your coverage is . If you have appropriate limits you could be fully restored , minus the deductible . It is very important to have the correct limits for coverage on your renters policy . To make sure that you have adequate coverage take a picture of everything that you own inside your apartment . Then make a chart showing the property and the estimated cost of replacing the property . When you add up that list you will have the amount of coverage you should set as a limit for your policy . The pictures and estimates should be stored off-site in case that hurricane becomes a reality . Hurricanes often result in a loss of life . While that might seem remote , this might be a good time to consider what will happen to those that you leave behind . A quick inventory of debts would be a good thing to have handy . If you can eliminate debts and pay for final expenses you would be a great help to those that you love . Every weekend we see people on street corners seeking donations or offering car wash services so they can pay the expenses for a loved one . It is sad but it can be avoided with just a small amount of planning .
Yes , an apartment complex can require renters insurance . The majority of them do . By requiring renters insurance , apartments are able to make sure that everyone living there would be able to pay for damage they caused through negligence , like a kitchen fire . This protects other tenants , as well as the apartment complex .
Tenants should have renters insurance to insure the contents inside their apartment as well provide insurance should they cause the structure to be damaged by fire , flood or smoke . If you are the tenant in an apartment and accidently do somthing in your apartment that damages anothers personal property and or the building , you could be held liable for the damage . Most renters insurance offers a minimum of 25000 in contents coverage and 300,000 in personal liability coverage . This insurance generally costs about $ 20,00 per month . Keith Prim Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
To help protect yourself and your family against financial hardshipth that could be caused by unforseen circumstances in your life . If a fire occurs in the apartment complex that you rent in . How will afford to replace all of your items that you have lost ? How will you pay the rent for another place to live right away after the fire ? How would you pay for damages for someone that you injured while in your apartment ? These are just a few of the things that renters insurance can cover . Remember every carrier and policy is different . Please read your policy completely to know the coverage provided and any exclusions there may be .
Rates for renters insurance depend upon a few factors . Where your apartment is located , how much personal property you are insuring and what liability rates you requested . For example , in Michigan , where I live I can get renters insurance covering $ 30,000 of personal property with $ 300,000 in liability coverage for about $ 200/year . The point is renters insurance is very affordable . I hope this helps .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Your Child Need Life Insurance ?
Getting life insurance for your child , in my opinion , is more important than ever before . With the advancement of medicine , there are many health conditions being diagnosed , and even tendencies toward health conditions are noted in medical records . While this is wonderful for saving lives , it can have a negative impact on insurability and life insurance rates . Getting life insurance for your child ensures that they will have a good life insurance rate for the rest of their lives . Even if you just put them on a child rider , they can convert the amount of the rider to 5 times that amount of life insurance when they become an adult .
Yes , indeed . Think about when he or she gets older . Buy a home and take out a mortgage ? No problem - has a policy already so the family can pay it off . Start a business and need a policy to qualify for a bank loan ? Got one . An emergency requires lots of cash in a pinch ? The cash in the policy is available within days . Unfortunately comes down with diabetes or another illness , and may have to pay a lot for a new policy ? Now worries - already covered . See what I mean ?
Life Insurance for children is a good idea for a family . The first benefit would be for the event of a death of a child then the family could use the benefit to pay for funeral and burial expenses . This benefit would take away additional stress in a very difficult time . The second reason would be providing a good start for the child 's future family as many of these policies offer great conversion rates in the future . Every family needs protection and that would include the child 's future family . This policy would be beneficial if the child was unable to obtain a policy later in life if they developed a illness or disease that prevented them from getting insurance .
Does your child need life insurance ? Well there will be an answer for everybody and they may not be the same . I purchased life insurance on my children . Here are a few reasons why ... . if one of my children were to die , I do n't think I would be able to go straight back to work on Monday as if nothing happened . I would n't want to have the price of the headstone and service costs get into the pain my wife and I would be experiencing . Imagine telling your wife `` that costs too much '' for the headstone she wants for your child . I also bought for positive reasons too . I purchased whole life so they have permanent insurance working hard at a low cost for them . They have solid cash values and life insurance to take into adulthood .
A child rider on Term life insurance adds life insurance to your policy that will cover your child -LRB- ren -RRB- . It is usually available to children age 15 days to approx age 17 -LRB- the age varies by company -RRB- . You select a face amount of the child rider , usually between $ 5,000 and $ 25,000 . This that would pay if a tragedy occurred in your family , and you lost one or more of your children . The child rider benefit would pay that entire amount for each deceased child . The rider pays for death by any reason , just as your policy does , with the exception of suicide in first two years , or if your child had a serious health condition that was not disclosed on the application and death occurred during the first two years of purchasing the rider . If your child has type 1 diabetes , intellectual disability , or other maladies , unfortunately , they will not be able to be on the rider.Therefore , it is good to get the rider while your first child is young ; then the rest are automatically added . While few children pass away , the real value of a child rider can come when your child turns approx 25 -LRB- again , the age varies by company -RRB- . At that time the child rider can usually be changed to a permanent life insurance policy of about 5 times the face amount of the child rider . They do not ask any health questions , so if your child developed an illness after being put on the rider , it will not matter . They will then have a reasonably priced life insurance policy for the rest of their lives .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
A child is not an economic unit . Quite the opposite , however , the loss of a child can have a financial impact on the family . This is rarely the motivation for the purchase of life insurance on a child but if you drive the city streets often you will see people asking for donations to help bury a child . It is sad but it does happen . Most people who purchase life insurance on a child are trying to secure coverage for a lifetime at an early age in order to set a very low premium for the coverage and to avoid the possibility that the child might become uninsurable in the future . My brother became uninsurable at about age 22 . This is an issue that concerns many . Life insurance plans are often seen as savings vehicles to accumulate money for future requirements . It is probably not the best way to save money for a college education but it does provide a systematic way to set aside money and for that money to grow free of current taxation . The life insurance policies available to children often have a rider that allows the child to purchase additional life insurance at specific times in the future without proving evidence of insurability . This can be extremely important .
There is three reasons to insure a child with permanent life insurance . First , the reason no one likes to think about , but a child 's death is devastating on all levels , but is a possibility . Not having the money to bury a child just adds extra hardship during an extremely difficult time . Second reason is to protect the child 's insurability . Once the child has a life insurance policy , they can in most cases increase face amounts without proof of underwriting . This is crucial to a child diagnosed with type I diabetes , cancer or even worse . The third and final reason to insure a child with life insurance is the cash value . Not only can you use the policy as a teaching moment for the child to learn to save but the many uses as the child grows into an adult . Cash value from a life insurance policy can be used for emergencies , hardships , as well as college , a down payment on a first house or even retirement . Child life insurance is so affordable and important , every parent should strongly consider it for their children .
In Canada , you can own a policy on anyone you have an insurable interest in -LRB- with their permission -RRB- including yourself . If your company owns the life insurance on your life and the company is not the beneficiary . It would be considered a taxable benefit . With one exception transfer of ownership is considered a deemed disposition . In other words it could trigger a taxable gain . The Income Tax Act provides for the transfer of a policy to the policyowners child , without a taxable disposition to the policyowner , if a child of the policyowner is the only person insured . Child includes any natural or adopted child , grandchild , stepchild , son - or daughter-in-law . THAT ONE EXCEPTION creates a planning opportunity . Does it make sense to keep paying income tax each year on the growth of your non-registered investments ? Use non-registered assets you wont need during your lifetime . Buy an exempt permanent life insurance policy . Structure the policy to : enable tax-efficient distribution of your assets to future generations and give you control and access while living . Growth inside a permanent life insurance policy is not subject to annual tax -LRB- within limits -RRB- and Proceeds of life insurance go to named beneficiaries tax-free . Example : How it works : You own the policy . Your adult child is the insured person , Your grandchild is the beneficiary While living , Your adult child is contingent owner At your death , Your adult child becomes owner of policy Benefits for you Taxes - Reduce your annual income tax Control - Keep control of your assets - Can change beneficiary and coverage amount -LRB- subject to underwriting requirements -RRB- - Can access the cash value in the policy if necessary Legacy - Preserve your legacy for your children and grandchildren - Generate estate value , not taxable income If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Child Riders : I always offer a child rider to parents . Recently -LRB- today -RRB- I added $ 20,000 child rider a mother 's policy . It cost her a whopping $ 8.60 . Not each , but for all 4 children . So the cost per child is $ 2.15 . And if she has more children or adopts they are covered from the 15th day of life with no qualifying . No extra cost . The automatic coverage has meant the difference of being able to cover a child born with a grave illness or not . Which brings up another benefit of most child riders . Guaranteed convertibility of up 5 or 6 times the amount . In the case above when a child reaches age 25 they have the guaranteed right to convert the $ 20,000.00 rider to $ 100,000.00 Permanent plan . No medical questions , no exams , no blood work . At standard rates . That is a huge benefit . We have converted young cancer patients , a Marine in Iraq and a 25 year old that had been in a coma for years to name a few . All for $ 8.60 or $ 2.15 per child . And they can still buy individual policies on the kids . Or use the saved money to buy much more coverage on mom and dad . Individual child policies : I am also a big proponent of short paying a childs policy . Actually just about anyone under 60 that can afford the extra premium . I do not really show cash values on small policies as they take a very long time to grow and normally do not amount to much . Twenty years ago we were selling $ 5,000 Burial and Child plans . While better than nothing , the now grown children are underwhelmed with the face amount or small cash values . Today I am suggesting much larger plans . Not child plans but plans that will be worth more when they are adults and need to protect their own children . $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 or even $ 250,000 plans are not unusual and very reasonable from top rated Insurance Companies . Starting at about $ 20 . As always an experienced Life Insurance Agent is your best source of information . One that has more than one or two companies or types of insurance .
I am not sure I would say that a child needs life insurance . There are two main reasons to insure a child , one is financial savings and the other is protecting insurability . Writing a whole life or universal life policy , or cash value plan , on a child has advantages to be able to save extra money for college , a first home or even retirement . The premiums are very affordable and with the right plan can have a good guaranteed rate of return on investment . The second reason is protect the child 's insurability . If you purchase life insurance on a child most all companies have a conversion clause which means the child can convert to higher face amounts , five , ten or greater times the original death benefit without proof of insurability . If the child had a diagnosis in later life and became uninsurable then they would have this policy at a very reasonable rate for the rest of their life .
Life insurance is not for the living , but for those left behind . Only you can answer the question , `` Do I need life insurance ? '' . The most common purpose of life insurance proceeds is to replace lost income of the decedent and pay debts of the estate . But personally owned life insurance is much more . Large estates with complicated and non-liquid assets should consider life insurance to cover estate shrinkage and add liquidity . Larger estates also usually incur tax liabilities that can be paid with life insurance proceeds . Some individuals like to endow charities or educational institutions with life insurance proceeds . One of the most debated life insurance needs is on the life of a child . Many will argue that children do not incur debt nor do they generate income , so there is no need to buy life insurance on a child . As a parent I can think of nothing worse than the loss of a child . Feeling pressure to return to work the day following services because of financial needs would only compound the loss . Parents need time to grieve the loss of a child and do so with dignity .
You should buy life insurance for a child within the first 30 days of birth . Insuring a child is very affordable and does a few things . First , in case of loss of life , it would pay final expenses which range from $ 8,000 to $ 12,000 . Next it will protect the child 's insurability . If a child ends up with juvenile diabetes or cancer and they have purchased a convertible policy , they now have life insurance at a very affordable rate the rest of their life . Lastly , purchasing cash value life insurance can help the child in later life with funds for college , down payment for a house or even retirement .
Excellent and Important Question . Every parent should have life insurance on a child . You can get Whole -LRB- Permanent -RRB- Life Insurance on a Child for very little money , so larger amounts are possible . No you do not expect a child to die you . It has nothing to do with that . It deals with Guaranteed Insurability ! You never know when a child may develop a childhood disease , be in an accident , or develop childhood diabetes . Once that happen , that child might otherwise become uninsurable , meaning they could never get life insurance on themselves . If you gave them Life Insurance as a child , and it was continued , with the guaranteed , locked in very low rate , that child is now able to continue to have life insurance for the balance of their lives . If you also added a rider to add to the coverage , you could even increase the coverage over time , all at guaranteed lowest rates . You need to get together with a reliable Life Insurance Agent who can thoroughly review your entire picture and recommend the best choice of options for you , with a detailed explanation . Give me a call please . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
I agree with Bob and Larry above and to add a little more detail about the age range : A parent can take out a life insurance policy for a child 's benefit , usually when the child is 2 weeks old . The parent does this to provide guaranteed insurability for the child and/or to provide a vehicle to accumulate money for the child . When the child is 18 or older , the parent can change ownership to the child . The maximum age that I have seen to take out a policy is 90 years old .
Several reasons , some pretty straight forward and some you may not have given thought to . First is the misfortune of losing a child . What will you do ? Will you need time ? Will you need money to purchase the things you and your spouse want to for the child ? Can you turn to your spouse and say `` No , we ca n't aford that headstone , let 's get something cheaper . '' ? While it is easy to have an answer when not faced with the situation . It 's another thing to live through losing a child . Now for the positive . Locking permanent life insurance in for a child gives them the best price at the lowest cost when they are in the best health . The opportunity to build cash values over a long period of time is pretty good . The other thing you can do with a child 's policy is buy future insurability options where your child can increase their insurance later in life without medical underwriting at the same class . What these future options do is `` take away '' an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child later in life when maybe their health is not so good . This feature alone is more valuable than most imagine . I have insurance on my kids , never thought of a good honest reason not to provide it for them . It covered them while they grew and gives them a headstart as adults . It 's a positive thing to do .
That depends entirely upon how the child support agreement was constructed . If there is not a specific requirement in the child support agreement that the person required to provide child support is required to provide health insurance for the child -LRB- ren -RRB- then there is a very high probability that they would not be required to provide health insurance . So , if the child support judgment requires one partner to just pay `` X '' amount of dollars every month for child support and makes no mention of a requirement to provide health insurance either out of that amount or in addition to it is unlikely that without a new judgment the ex-partner would have to provide health insurance . In my experience , a good divorce attorney specifically addresses this issue in writing in the order of child support as to which parent has the responsibility for providing health insurance for dependent children and even the potential duration of this requirement and the circumstances where it might be voided -LRB- re-marriage for example -RRB- . I am sure the rules on this crucial issue vary from state to state . Any couple with children who are divorcing should have this issue of responsibility for health insurance coverage clearly spelled out in their divorce and child support agreement .
As long as your child is driving your car or a car titled to you , you can keep your child on your insurance . Once your child purchases a car in your child 's name that child must purchase their own insurance . There is no age requirement , it is based on who owns the car , you or your child .
One of the most debated life insurance needs is on the life of a child . Many will argue that children do not incur debt nor do they generate income , so there is no need to buy life insurance on a child . As a parent I can think of nothing worse than the loss of a child . Feeling pressure to return to work the day following services because of financial needs would only compound the loss . Parents need time to grieve the loss of a child and do so with dignity .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How To Write A Letter To Cancel Auto Insurance ?
That is a great question ! Basically all that you will need to do is write a note that tells them that you would like to cancel the insurance that you have with them , policy #xxxxxxx , effective as of whatever date that you would like for it to end , and sign and date it . You will also want to make sure that you are paid up through that date , and that they do n't owe you money for excess premium paid . I hope that it is safe to assume that you have found other coverage before you do that . Take a look at your policy , or call your agent , just to be certain that there is n't a 30 day notice required , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Can you cancel your term life insurance ? Yes , you can cancel a term policy a couple of ways . First , simply let the insurance company know in writing that you wish to cancel . They will cancel on the date asked for or the date of receipt of the letter if no cancelation date is given . They will refund any premium unused . The second way is to let the premium lapse . Why would you do it this way ? Because it gives you a grace period to really be sure it 's what you want to do . I remember my first day in this business , there was a couple of people in the office crying in loud voices , `` but he did n't mean it '' . They were there trying to reinstate a policy that the owner had just cancelled and died like a week later . There was the letter from the insured , demanding his policy be cancelled on a certain date and it was . Unfortunately , he died a few days after .
If you have had a claim denied and you disagree with the determination in the letter that was sent to you the letter will also have an explanation of how you should respond . Generally the letter would state you have 30 days to put in writing why you feel your claim should not be denied . State all the facts clearly then mail the letter in to the address on the letter sent to you and your rebuttal will be reviewed . If you are still denied but feel you are right and the insurance provider is incorrect in their assessment you can write to your states department of insurance and they can look into the matter . I also highly recommend you discuss the matter with your agent .
The simplest way to cancel any insurance is to simply stop paying the premiums . The policy will lapse and be cancelled . If you 've paid premiums in advance you may be able to get a partial refund if you write a letter formally cancelling the policy and requesting a refund of the unused portion of premiums paid . You will want to keep a copy of the dated letter and have the one you mail certified with a delivery receipt .
Always . You do n't have to wait for your renewal date , either . Whatever happened that makes you want to switch does n't matter . It 's your home and your choice as to whom you choose to insure it . Just be sure to go about it in the correct manner . The first step is to find a new agent , one you can trust . It does n't really matter if it 's an independent agent or an agent that only writes through one company . Most good companies wo n't be that far apart so choose your agent first . Find one that cares and can explain everything to you and take their advice . Then you can cancel your current policy . The correct way to do this is to write them a letter requesting the policy to be cancelled and choose the effective date of the new policy . They 'll cancel your policy and send you back any unused premium . This will usually take a week or so before you receive your refund check .
In order to cancel Travelers renters insurance policy you would either contact your Travelers agent or Travelers directly to notify them of your request to cancel your renters policy . Most likely you will be asked to provide a letter in writing that is dated and signed to process the cancellation request .
Any time you request a cancellation for insurance it 's best to put it in writing . You can write a letter and fax or e-mail it directly to Progressive . I would also recommend following up a day later to make sure they received the document . If you 've moved make sure you include your new address if you are owed a refund .
You can cancel homeowners insurance at any time . Call your insurance company or agent and tell them that you want to cancel coverage . They will issue an amended declaration that will show that all coverage ceased on the date that you called . They will send you a bill for any premium that is still due or a refund of any premium not used . They will send the same declaration to your mortgage company who will then start writing letters to you and will ultimately force issue a policy to cover their interests and send you the invoice for the premium , normally as a part of your mortgage bill .
how to write an appeal letter for Disability Insurance ? If you 've been declined for issue of a Disability policy you can appeal to the underwriter to reconsider the decline if you have additional information to offer or there is some change to what is in question . Underwriters , especially disability coverage underwriters work under strict guidelines . In order to appeal you must be able to introduce new information . Usually with a decline , the letter will provide the reason for .
You can cancel a health insurance policy at any time . The best way is to contact your broker or insurer -LRB- by phone -RRB- and request the termination of coverage . If they ask that you submit your request in writing , promptly send them a letter or email that details exactly when you want the policy to end .
You can stop term life insurance in one of two ways . First , you could just stop paying premiums . The policy will go into it 's grace period then lapsing after that , about 30 days . The second is to write a letter to the insurance company notifying them of your intentions effective and a date you choose . I always caution people about canceling any life insurance . You will most likely pay more premiums when you go to apply for more insurance . Also , insurability could be an issue if your health is worse at the time of application or the history has issues in it .
Certainly , but you do not want this situation as most policies contain a ` other insurance ' clause in them and this could create problems you do not need in the event of a loss/claim occurringin the ` overlap ' period . Follow the cancellation procedures outlined in the policy you desire to cancel and have no gap between the cancelled policy and the replacement policy . DO NOT RELY ON A NEW BROKER OR AGENT TO CANCEL YOUR EXISTING POLICY WITHOUT GETTING DOCUMENTATION IN WRITING THEY ARE SENDING APPROPRIATE CANCELLATION DOCUMENTS AND EVIDENCE TO YOUR CURRENT CARRIER . Remember , the contract is between you and your current carrier and only you -LRB- the named insured -RRB- can request cancellation of your policy . Also be aware that ` auto pay ' or ` EFT ' payment modes on an existing policy may not be terminated immediately and your account may be ` swept ' for a premium due within the next 21 to 30 days . Make sure your auto pay or EFT plan is terminated asap -LRB- and get evidence -RRB- when your policy is cancelled .
Writing a cover letter to insurance carriers informing them of the death of an insured should discuss the cause of death and the circumstances that surround it . Short and to the point communication is best . In the vast majority of cases , a family member , who may also be a beneficiary , compose cover letters to the insurance company . If the death occurred during the first two years , the insurance company will investigate the death with greater due diligence to confirm if suicide was that cause of death . If suicide was the cause of death the claim would be denied .
How to write a letter for a life insurance claim ? There really is n't a need to . Contact the carrier or go online and you will find or request a death claim form . In it , there should be instructions on how to fill out and what additonal paperwork may be necessary . Usually a certified copy of the death certificate is needed for submittal . Your agent should be able to help you complete the steps you need to .
Auto policies normally do not provide a grace period . When the policy is not renewed coverage ceases on the expiration date . Normally the company will issue a letter advising you of the date that coverage will cease . If that date is past you expiration date , you are responsible to pay the premium for that period of time , even if you chose to not renew the policy . The company may extend a period of time for you to reinstate coverage , but a cancellation letter is probably being sent at the same time .
Stopping a term life insurance policy is fairly easy . The best and preferred way to stop coverage is to write your life insurance company requesting to cancel . All correspondence must be in writing to protect both parties , never just call and cancel . You will receive a confirmation . Most life insurance companies will allow you to reinstate , or change your mind , up to 180 days by paying back premiums . After that time period you will have to reapply for coverage . The second way to cancel a term life policy is to stop paying your premiums . The policy will lapse after your 31 day grace period . While this method is maybe the easiest , you will receive a lot of correspondence from the carrier , warning the lapse of your policy . It is always best just to write , mail , scan or fax your request and be done .
The letters at the end of your Medicare number are used as designations that describe how you qualified for Medicare . The letter A means you were a Social Security wage earner . The letter W means you are a widower of an eligible spouse , W1 a widower . Letter M is someone who is covered under Part A only .
Yes , if they have violated the contract that you and they agreed to . Trust me on this one . It is soooo much better first to to to your agent and see if he has a common sense answer . If they do not , some do not they can not even get out of the rain because they think flood is covered under the homeowners policy -RRB- . Most agents would rather tell their spouse know and feel the pain than to tell a cash paying customer their screwed . Next , you can not imagine how much heat you can bring down by calling and then writing a letter to the department of insurance fulling explaining in exact detail what is going on ... also , adjusters have recorders and so should you with all conversations even on the phone
Automobile insurance coverage is an at will policy . You may cancel the policy at any point that you wish and the insurance carrier will typically return the unused portion of the policy premium to you . Your current carrier will more than likely require you to sign one of their cancellation forms or have you send a signed letter to them to verify your desire to cancel the policy .
A homeowners policy can be cancelled if the home is not as represented in the application . A recent client indicated that they didnt have any pets . When a company representative visited the home they were introduced to the familys favorite pit bull . This resulted in a cancellation letter . There are other similar situations . Of course , the policy can always be cancelled for not paying the premium . In fact most companies have very little tolerance for late payments on any property policy .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Can You Deduct Homeowners Insurance On A Rental Property ?
This is more of a question for a tax adviser , however based on my knowledge the answer would be yes , insurance on a rental property would be a deductible expense in most situations . Any business can deduct business expenses paid . Since rental property is a source of income , any expenses related to that property would be deductible .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
This is more of a question for a tax adviser , however based on my knowledge the answer would be yes , insurance on a rental property would be a deductible expense in most situations . Any business can deduct business expenses paid . Since rental property is a source of income , any expenses related to that property would be deductible .
While it may be true your own liability , comprehensive and collision coverage may extend to cover you when renting a car , most of the rental agreements I have read make the renter responsible for expenses not covered by most auto insurance policies . In addition to the responsibility for the deductible , most rental companies make you reimburse them for the loss of value to their damaged car , the revenue they lose while the car is out of service and even the administrative costs they incur having the car repaired . These costs are not covered by most auto insurance policies . Remember you gave them your credit card and permission to put those charges right on your card . That might make your trip one you will remember ! And the damage to the rental car might not even be your fault ! Unless you have a good personal umbrella policy without a following form auto limitation and/or personal property care custody or control exclusion , I suggest you consider buying the damage waiver rental companies offer . The price is ridiculously high but it avoids an argument with a big company who would have your money and doesnt like to give it back . If more people would read the rental agreement and object to accepting responsibility for these costs , maybe the rental companies would remove these indemnity clauses for many of their good repeat rental customers . Until then it may be a matter of Pay me now or Pay me later .
Renters Insurance is a type of property and casualty package policy that is available if you are renting the home in which you live . This can of course be anything including a rental apartment , rental condominium , loft or even a single family home . The policy is similar to a Homeowners policy in that it provides coverage for your personal belongings and also liability protection . Unlike a Homeowners policy it does not provide primary coverage for the dwelling in which you live . However , the liability portion would provide you with coverage in the event that you were responsible for damage done to that residence . This is why in many cases , you will be required to show that you have purchased Rental Insurance as a condition of your lease .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
If you own a home that is used as a Rental ; you would declare your Rental Income on a separate schedule on your income taxes . On the same reporting form , you will deduct expenses including property tax , insurance and any other deductible expenses . In this case , you would not have a Homeowners Insurance Policy , the policy should be a Landlords Package Policy instead meant for a tenant occupied property . If you do not carry the correct form of insurance , it is essential that you cancel your policy and purchase the correct form - insurance forms are not transferrable . This is a veryserious topic ; as you would expect , in the event of a disastrous claim , the insurance company will review your policy form and follow the coverage and definitions to calculate whether or not you are insured and how to proceed with the claims handling . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy landlords insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow Professionals , Mortgage Professionals and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
My previous career was for a rental company so I have a great deal of knowledge in this area . When determining purchasing insurance when renting a car it is important to consider these main factors . 1 -RRB- Quality of your own insurance policy If you have state minimum coverage dont except much help from your insurance company if something were to happen . 2 -RRB- Purpose of Rental - Yes , The reason why you are renting the car plays a big factor . Some insurance policies will only cover rental vehicles if it is a replacement rental . So if you are renting for a family vacation there is a possibility that you arent covered . Always check with your insurance company . 3 -RRB- Type of Vehicle Another huge factor , a lot of policies wont cover any vehicles that are built on a pick up truck frame . Most consumers are unaware that some minivans and SUVs are in fact built upon a pickup truck frames . The best way to protect yourself against this is to always rent a vehicle that similar to the car on your policy -LRB- If you have a SUV on your policy , you should be safe to drive a SUV -RRB- 4 -RRB- Does your credit card cover it ? A little known benefit -LRB- that most credit cards have -RRB- is rental coverage ! Some will require you to activate it before renting a vehicle while others will give it you automatically . I would always check with your credit card provider to see which type of coverage you have . They often pay for loss-of-use as well which is an extra bonus that most insurance policies wont cover . 5 -RRB- The Length of the rental - The longer the rental the more expensive the rental insurance becomes . At some point the amount of money you are paying for the extra insurance isnt going to be worth it . That breaking point is up to you to decide . 6 -RRB- If something were to happen right now , what can you afford ? I think this is the most important . The most common rental is a 3 day weekend rental . The typical insurance cost for that that length of time can be $ 60 to $ 200 . However , the cost of damage , loss of use , and deductibles can add up to be $ 2,000 and get as high as the total loss value of the vehicle . If you were to total out a vehicle would your insurance cover it ? Or could you afford a $ 20,000 vehicle that you wont drive ? 7 -RRB- Remember it is not your vehicle ! Very often damage happens to our own vehicle and we dont even notice or care because we consider the damage to be minimal . However this is not the case when renting a vehicle . You do not have control over what damages are fixed and which ones arent . So Keep in mind that a ding to you , could be consider major damage to them . At the end of the day , you have to be honest with yourself and determine if purchasing the extra insurance is worth it or not . Not every situation is a same and multiple factors needs to be taken into account .
Landlords Insurance also known as Dwelling Fire Insurance can be deducted on your income taxes against rental income . Homeowners Insurance would be the incorrect policy form for a tenant occupied property ; please be very cautious not to be insured by the incorrect form of insurance . Each policy form is a legal contract inclusive of specific definitions setting the rules of coverage . A homeowners policy is to protect the insured home as the primary residence of the titled owner ; if this is not the case and you have a rental home , it should be covered by a Tenant Occupied Landlord Package policy and sometimes known as a Dwelling Fire policy . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buyinsurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
The insurance company you currently have your auto insurance with may extend coverage to a rental car . If so you do have the option of waiving the coverage offered by the rental car agency . I recommend you contact your agent to verify if your coverage applies to a rental car since not all polices will extend to rental cars . Also depending on the state you are in there are advantages of purchasing the rental cars insurance . For example if you have a solo car accident the damage will be picked up by the rental car agency and not your own insurance carrier thereby avoiding any potential points that may apply . But again , I strongly suggest you contact your agent if you are not sure that your current insurance carrier will extend coverage to a rental car .
All auto insurance can provide you reimbursement for auto rentals ONLY IF you get that endorsement on your policy . The typical reimbursement for rental cars is $ 20/day up to $ 600 total . Most insurance companies will let you increase this up to around $ 50/day and $ 1,500 total . There is no standardized wording for this endorsement , either . I have seen it called `` rental reimbursement , '' `` rental coverage , '' `` rental guarantee . '' So , when you are looking through your policy to see if you have some type of rental coverage you need to look carefully .
Consult your attorney over legal questions , but it can be very easy to insert an insurance requirement into a lease agreement . Think about it . On a Homeowners ' policy you are required to have insurance by your mortgage company and to have them named on the policy . They do that because they want to make sure that thier interest is protected . Frankly , I always advise my clients who have rental properties to have such a clause included in the rental agreement . Having such proof of coverage in force for your tenant protects your interest as the property owner .
What you 're going to want is called a Renter 's policy . It is written on a homeowner 's policy platform , but gives no coverage for the physical property of the home . This type of policy provides coverage for your personal belongings as well as personal liability coverage for yourself . The hidden gem in a Renter 's policy is Loss of Use coverage . Loss of use provides coverage for your additional living expenses if you are not able to stay in your current rental due to a covered loss , such as fire or smoke damage , or hurricanes and tornadoes . The policy pays additional rental expense , transportation expense , and often times eating expenses due to the imposition of being without your original rental .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is Renters Insurance And What Does It Cover ?
Great question ! Renters insurance is like homeowners insurance , but for people who rent , and not own . It is designed to provide protection for the cost of replacing your belongings in the event that they were damaged or stolen . Your landlord will have insurance to cover their building , but it will not cover your things , so it is wise for you to do so . It can make a huge difference if something were to happen to your building , and is relatively inexpensive for the blessing that it can be . If you need more information , contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Renters insurance is a must have for everyone who rents a home or apartment and it 's very inexpensive . Renters insurance typically cost between $ 100 - $ 200 per year depending on how much personal property coverage you need . Renters insurance will cover your belongings and provide liability coverage . Renters insurance even covers personal property away from your home or apartment . For example , someone breaks into your car and steels your iPad . Most policies limit coverage away from your residence premise to 10 % but the example would be a covered loss .
Renters Insurance is a type of property and casualty package policy that is available if you are renting the home in which you live . This can of course be anything including a rental apartment , rental condominium , loft or even a single family home . The policy is similar to a Homeowners policy in that it provides coverage for your personal belongings and also liability protection . Unlike a Homeowners policy it does not provide primary coverage for the dwelling in which you live . However , the liability portion would provide you with coverage in the event that you were responsible for damage done to that residence . This is why in many cases , you will be required to show that you have purchased Rental Insurance as a condition of your lease .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
You really need to turn this one around and focus on what renters insurance does cover . Then , you can analyze your needs and interests in relation to what is covered and what is not and make your decisions accordingly . If you feel that you have a need for protection for something that does not appear to be covered in the policy , you might be able to add it through an endorsement , for an additional sum of money . An independent local agent can help you with this type of assessment . I think you will find that renters insurance coverage is fairly broad for many typical loss types in relation to renting , including often overlooked but very important liability coverage .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is : What does term life insurance cover ? Remember first of all , if we 're using term , it only covers that period in time . If you buy a 20-year term , as an example , it 's only going to cover you for 20 years . If you buy $ 1/2 million dollars of death benefit , you 'll have it for as long as you pay your premiums on time ; you 'll have that coverage . What is it good for ? How does it cover ? It 's going to cover anything that you think that you need . Let 's say , at $ 1/2 million , you had a mortgage at $ 250,000 , you had credit card debt , you had car debt , you had educational debt . You want to cover that so that your spouse or your beneficiaries will not be actually saddled with your debt if something happened to you . When I 'm looking at , ` What does term life insurance ? ' it 's the time zone , how long do I have , what obligations would I have , and how can I relieve my beneficiaries from any of those obligations if something happens to me ?
Renters insurance protects the landlord in the sense that it can provide extra liability protection A renters policy is taken out by the renter to cover the renters possessions . It does not cover the dwelling or items owned by the landlord . If however a renter is negligent and someone is injured on the property , the renters insurance will provide protection from lawsuit .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Renters Insurance is about your personal property . When you get Renters Insurance , you will be asked to list your property so the company knows what they are covering . Along with writing what you have down , I would recommend taking a video with your phone if you have that ability and save it . This is a good way to stay on top of what you have and what may have to be replaced in the event you have to file a claim .
It depends on many factors , but here are the main factors for price . 1 -RRB- What 's the policy type ? 2 -RRB- What 's the face amount ? 3 -RRB- What 's your gender ? 4 -RRB- What 's your age ? 5 -RRB- What 's your general health like ? 6 -RRB- Are you a tobacco user ? What you should look at are basically two main questions . What does the life insurance cover and how much do I need ? Cost is a factor for a policy , but it 's much more important to get the right policy with the riders you 'll need .
To help the tenant and themselves . If the apartment building experiencs a fire or tornado and the tenant losses everything . Without renters insurance how does the tenant replace the things lost and pay for another place to live ? Renters insurance also helps protect the renter against financial harship if someone should be injured while in their apartment and other covered situations . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand what coverage is provided and what exclusions ther may be .
A renter 's policy is the same as a homeowner 's policy except that it does not cover the building itself . You should have largely the same expectations from a renter 's policy as you woulda homeowner 's policy . So in the event of a covered claim you could be compensated for your physical loss of possessionsas well asextra living expenses associated with having to move afterthe claim . Renter 's policies also provide liability coverage to you and your family . This is very broad coverage that could cover anything from slip and trip exposures around the house to certain misfortunes that happen away from home as well . Talk to your broker to find out everything a renter 's policy covers and what endorsements you need .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Does Apartment Renters Insurance Cost ?
Because all insurance is based on the concept of shared risk , you could say that the cost is the total amount you would lose if you had your property destroyed or if you were sued . That is the cost if you chose to not insure your unit . If you insure the unit the cost then is your share of the possible losses of a large group of people . While that is a relatively modest amount it varies by a few factors , the primary being the amount of personal property that you want insured . Less property means lower premium .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Yes an apartment complex can require you to obtain renters insurance as a condition of renting their apartment . What apartments are concerned about is liability protection . Should the tenant be liable for bodily injury or property damage the apartment complex does not want to be the first in line to be sued for something the tenant caused . Instead the tenants renters insurance policy will defend against the loss first . The apartment complex will not care if you chose to carry coverage for your own personal property . Also on a side note if the tenant did not carry renters insurance and was sued for a loss , just because the apartment complex may have to defend does not give a free pass to the tenant . Your still going to court and it can cost you thousands . Renters insurance is very inexpensive and covers you for so much . Buy it .
Why some apartments require renters insurance can vary . First , lets cover what renters insurance covers . It covers your personal property , your liability and medical expenses . Second , your liability and medical coverage are the parts that are most important to the apartment . This is because your liability insurance can be used to cover damage done to the building due to your negligence . For example , lets say you leave the stove on and you leave your apartment . Lets further say it starts a fire and causes damage to the building . The apartment 's insurance will pay for the damages , but then it will subrogate against your insurance -LRB- meaning it will make a claim against your renters coverage -RRB- . Therefore , many apartment complexes ' insurance companies will require that all the tenants have a renters policy so it can recoup any of its losses caused by the apartment complex 's tenants .
Renters insurance is a must have for everyone who rents a home or apartment and it 's very inexpensive . Renters insurance typically cost between $ 100 - $ 200 per year depending on how much personal property coverage you need . Renters insurance will cover your belongings and provide liability coverage . Renters insurance even covers personal property away from your home or apartment . For example , someone breaks into your car and steels your iPad . Most policies limit coverage away from your residence premise to 10 % but the example would be a covered loss .
That is a great question ! The answer to your question is pretty simple - the one that gives you the most coverage for the least price . There are many good companies out there that have very similar renter 's policies , so it really comes down to which one in your area provides the most coverage for the least cost . Ask for `` replacement cost '' coverage , and have a very detailed list of everything that will go into your apartment - serial/model numbers and pictures of all electronics , and pictures and count sheets of everything else . Use a value calculator -LRB- most renters insurance companies will have one on their site , I happen to like Liberty Mutual 's , as it is simple , and quotes your price as you go -RRB- to help you get an idea of the value of your stuff , and the amount of coverage needed . Since the cost of coverage will vary greatly from neighborhood to neighborhood , and even apartment building to apartment building , it 's hard to give you a company name to look at . Most apartment complexes can refer you to a preferred insurer , Thank you for asking !
The average cost is much lower than you might think . People living in apartments in Fresno , California can buy a renters policy for less than $ 10 per month . That will provide around $ 20,000 of protection for personal property and $ 300,000 for liability protection in the event of personal injury and property damage . The policies are transferrable when you move from apartment to apartment and many companies will discount a homeowners policy when you have had a renters policy with them .
To help the tenant and themselves . If the apartment building experiencs a fire or tornado and the tenant losses everything . Without renters insurance how does the tenant replace the things lost and pay for another place to live ? Renters insurance also helps protect the renter against financial harship if someone should be injured while in their apartment and other covered situations . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand what coverage is provided and what exclusions ther may be .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
You need renters insurance when you have something to loose . That something could be more than your stuff . It could be the reasonable rent you have . If there were a fire , and you had to leave for another apartment , you might have to pay more rent . LOSS OF USE is a coverage built in to the policy . If you have to leave your 2 bedroom , second floor apartment where you pay $ 500 a month because of a fire , you can move into a similar apartment and if that similar apartment cost more , LOSS OF USE will pay for the extra -LRB- above $ 500 -RRB- rent . It will not pay for you to move into a four bedroom penthouse apartment . That 's not similar . If a friend or someone else visits , goes to the bathroom and slips on the floor they could get injured ... badly . A renters policy includes two important coverages : MEDICAL PAYMENTS and BODILY INJURY LIABILITY . MEDICAL PAYMENTS would pay hospital or doctor expenses necessary to treat your friend . The limit is usually $ 1,000 but you can buy more and it 's cheap . If your friend gets a lawyer and sues you , BODILY INJURY LIABILIYT will pay for an attorney to defend you AND pay the damages if you lose . The limits generally start at $ 100,000 , but check the price for higher limits as it also is cheap . Finally , there is your stuff . Maybe it 's used and worn and you do n't think it 's worth a lot . But if you had to go out and buy EVERYTHING all over again , it would be expensive . You can buy insurance that will replace your old stuff with new stuff . You just have to make sure you have REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE . REMEMBER : Insurance does not cover everything for every imaginable kind of claim . There are limits and exclusions . They are generally the same from company to company . Find an agent you can talk to and ask questions . Good Luck Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers 877-414-2031 WEBSITELINK
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
Renter insurance makes a lot of sense . If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle . Yes it makes sense to buy renters insurance .
Great question ! The purpose of renters insurance is to protect you , in the event that your belongings are damaged , destroyed , or stolen . Let 's say your apartment catches on fire . The landlords insurance pays for the building your apartment is in , and your renters insurance pays for your things inside the apartment when it was destroyed . Without the renters insurance , you are at a loss to replace those things , as the landlords insurance wo n't . It is a good thing to have , especially if you do not have the money to start all over replacing everything that you had owned . If you have more questions , I 'll be happy to help , feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Perhaps a better question would be , how much does it cost to not have renters insurance ? It could cost you everything that you own . It could cost you hundreds of thousands of dollars in a lawsuit . It could make you find another place to live without any possessions and without notice if your apartment is damaged by fire . The cost for not having a policy could be quite high . The cost for having one that provides coverage for these possibilities is reasonable .
Tenants should have renters insurance to insure the contents inside their apartment as well provide insurance should they cause the structure to be damaged by fire , flood or smoke . If you are the tenant in an apartment and accidently do somthing in your apartment that damages anothers personal property and or the building , you could be held liable for the damage . Most renters insurance offers a minimum of 25000 in contents coverage and 300,000 in personal liability coverage . This insurance generally costs about $ 20,00 per month . Keith Prim Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
A renters policy provides coverage for damage that is the result of a covered peril . Since there is a wide variety of forms this can not be answered for every case , however , most policies list windstorm or hail right after fire and lightning . These are the fundamental coverages contained in most policies . The coverage has some limitations . The company will normally not pay for loss to property inside a structure , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water , all whether driven by wind or not , which enter through an opening not made by the direct force of wind or hail . The company is not likely to pay for the loss to watercraft and their trailers unless inside a fully enclosed building . Smaller water craft normally have coverage . If your property damage is subject to ordinance or law , such as a connection for an appliance , there might be a limitation on the increased cost of replacement that comes because of that law or ordinance . If the hurricane causes landslides or erosion , damage to your personal property arising from that movement of land might not be covered either . The same is true if the damage comes from flood water or tidal waves . This exclusion applies whether it is caused by wind or not . If the hurricane interrupts power supply the insurance company probably will deny coverage on any loss that result from that cause , for example rotting food in a freezer . If you are running a business out of your apartment , the company will probably exclude any loss that comes from that business to include interruption because there isnt power or people can not reach your apartment . The chances are quite good that if a hurricane strikes your apartment , that your renters policy will replace your property up to the limits of the policy . This is when you find out how good your coverage is . If you have appropriate limits you could be fully restored , minus the deductible . It is very important to have the correct limits for coverage on your renters policy . To make sure that you have adequate coverage take a picture of everything that you own inside your apartment . Then make a chart showing the property and the estimated cost of replacing the property . When you add up that list you will have the amount of coverage you should set as a limit for your policy . The pictures and estimates should be stored off-site in case that hurricane becomes a reality . Hurricanes often result in a loss of life . While that might seem remote , this might be a good time to consider what will happen to those that you leave behind . A quick inventory of debts would be a good thing to have handy . If you can eliminate debts and pay for final expenses you would be a great help to those that you love . Every weekend we see people on street corners seeking donations or offering car wash services so they can pay the expenses for a loved one . It is sad but it can be avoided with just a small amount of planning .
Although I have answered similar questions of this nature previously , it is such an important coverage that I will repeat it . While I obviously do not know your particular situation and whether or not your landlord requires you to maintain renters insurance , I can tell you the following that might help you see the value of some of the coverages provided . Renters ' insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and others . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . No one was hurt but the apartment became uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy , they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions and they received reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . Additionally , the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... but the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation . That alone would have cost them heavy legal fees . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time .
Yes , an apartment complex can require renters insurance . The majority of them do . By requiring renters insurance , apartments are able to make sure that everyone living there would be able to pay for damage they caused through negligence , like a kitchen fire . This protects other tenants , as well as the apartment complex .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is American General Life And Accident Insurance Company ?
American General Life and Accident Insurance Company -LRB- AGLA -RRB- merged with American General Life Insurance Company -LRB- AGL -RRB- on January 1 , 2013 . At this time , no policies are issued by American General Life and Accident Insurance Company . American General life insurance products , accidental death policies , and annuities are now all written under the American General Life Insurance Company -LRB- AGL -RRB- .
American General Life and Accident Insurance Company -LRB- AGLA -RRB- merged with American General Life Insurance Company -LRB- AGL -RRB- on January 1 , 2013 . At this time , no policies are issued by American General Life and Accident Insurance Company . American General life insurance products , accidental death policies , and annuities are now all written under the American General Life Insurance Company -LRB- AGL -RRB- .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
As of 3-24-2015 , the financial ratings for American General are : Standard & Poor 's - A + Moody 's Investor Service - A2 A M Best Company - A Fitch Ratings - A + American General and AGLA -LRB- American General Life and Accident -RRB- are now under the brand name AIG -LRB- American International Group -RRB- .
Western National Life was acquired by American General Life in late 2012 . American International Group -LRB- AIG -RRB- owns American General Life . So Western National Life is now part of American General , and American General is owned by American International Group . They are not the same , however , as American International Group is simply the parent holding company .
That is an interesting question . I 've been an agent for many years , and I can speak from experience when I tell you that price is not based on color . I do not work with any companies -LRB- and I work with many -RRB- that would even consider breaking the law that way . That said , there are some things that come into play that might make you think -LRB- wrongly , I promise you -RRB- that It may cost more for African Americans . Life insurance costs are based in great part upon risk factors , including high blood pressure , diabetes , and obesity . These factors , along with heart disease are statistically common among all Americans , but much more so among African Americans . The American Heart Association in an article released last September suggests that a gene found in African Americans may be the cause for the highest rates of hypertension in the world . This disease is the leading cause of heart disease -LRB- # 1 killer of Americans -RRB- and strokes -LRB- # 4 killer -RRB- . Their article also outlines problems with obesity -LRB- 63 % of men , 77 % of women over 20 years old -RRB- among the community , as well as higher rates of diabetes -LRB- 2x as likely as whites to have it , among those 20 and older 15 % have the disease -RRB- . The US Dept. of Health and Human Services Office of Minority Health documents higher rates of cancers among the African American community in 2009 research , as well as higher mortality rates . Insurance companies are n't as concerned about the causes and reasons behind the statistics , as much as the heath issues of the applicants . If you are of any race , your rate will be higher if you suffer from diabetes or hypertension , especially if it has gone uncontrolled . The life expectancy of anyone with those issues is shortened , and so the companies bear more risk , and as a result charge more . The better the health , the cheaper the rates might be a simple way to put it , since the risk to the company determines the rate they will charge to insure you . If you smoke , expect to pay more . If you are overweight , expect to pay more . This will be true regardless of race , where you live , or the amount of coverage you apply for . I hope that this helps you understand how the industry works , and why it might seem like it is unfair . Thanks for asking !
Estimates of the numbers of uninsured Americans have always varied widely depending upon the definitions used . As of June of 2014 and the completion of the first open enrollment period for ObamaCare a firm count on the numbers of insured and uninsured Americans is yet to be announced . After all the effort , expense and turmoil associated with the passage and implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- the initial indications are that we have slightly reduced the number of uninsured Americans . A poll released in April , 2014 indicates that the uninsured rate declined from a peak of approximately 18 % in the summer of 2013 -LRB- which was the high point since the start of the recession in 2008 - the overall average uninsured rate for the 2008 through 2013 period was more in the 16 % to 16.5 % range -RRB- to approximately 15.6 % at the end of the first quarter of 2014 . This represented about a 1.5 % decrease in the uninsured population from January 1 , 2014 -LRB- 17.1 % -RRB- to the end of March , 2014 and our uninsured rate remains above the level that existed before the 2008 financial crisis . Assuming that we have a population of approximately 320 million in the United States , my math would indicate that leaves close to 50 million uninsured Americans . The number I hear and see used most often states that there are still more than 30 million Americans without health insurance . I ca n't reconcile the different numbers but what is clear is that our efforts to insure every American have fallen significantly short ofthe stated objective .
These are the ratings of American General Life Insurance company as of February 14 , 2013 : Standard & Poors - A + -LRB- Strong -RRB- Moody 's Investor Service - A2 -LRB- Good -RRB- Fitch Ratings - A + -LRB- Strong -RRB- A.M. Best Company - A + -LRB- Excellent -RRB- American General Life Companies have been in business for 160 years and have over 13 Million customers .
American General Life Insurance Company is owned by the international insurance giant AIG . After the government bailout , AIG paid back all its government loans and has emerged a significant holding company for several financial institutions that include insurance companies like American General and broker dealer firms under The Advisor Group .
That is a great question ! There are really two schools of thought about life insurance . One school believes that the money that someone would pay for a policy should be saved and invested , and those funds used to ensure the well being of the loved ones left behind . The second school of thought is buy young , and be prepared . I can see wisdom in both views . There can be much higher rates of return on the investments made with what would have been the premium money if invested wisely.But ... I am a pretty staunch realist , and the sad reality is that most Americans ca n't / do n't save , and even fewer know how to invest what they do . As a result , nearly 3/4 's of Americans live paycheck to paycheck , and are one disaster away from bankruptcy . -LRB- Want some scary data for your paper ? Go look at the 2012 Census data ... -RRB- Life insurance provides a `` forced savings '' method of providing for the need for protection . As long as the payments are made , your family is protected . And in my opinion , life insurance provides three serious benefits that the first view ca n't match : There is no guarantee on how long we live , and there is a real chance that disaster could strike before the amount needed to protect your loved ones could be accumulated . With a policy , if it 's in force one day , and you were -LRB- God forbid -RRB- to pass away in an accident on the second , the policy would pay out in full . What investment pays off that well ? Secondly , that benefit paid is tax free , and generally probate free . Many estate battles take years , and on average eat away about 40 % of the value of the estate that would have been left . The third , and in this economy that favors the wealthy and stresses the majority of Americans , a whole life policy provides a source of money in an emergency . As the policy increases in age , it also increases in its cash value . That value becomes available for the policy owner to withdraw if a need arises , with virtually no questions asked . With interest rates and credit ratings what they are for the majority , having a strings free cash source can be a life saver . I hope that gives you some food for thought for your essay . I almost forgot to mention that the younger you are when you purchase your policy , typically the cheaper it is . Most companies lock that price in for you , so it is set for your whole lifetime . As a result , a policy purchased in one 's 20 's typically will be cheaper , and much easier to get than a policy purchased when one is in their 50 's or 60 's . If you 'd like more help , please feel free to contact me . This is a lazy week for most of us , and I 'll have some free time :-RRB- Thanks for asking , and good luck on your paper !
There are literally hundreds of life insurance companies in the United States alone and hundreds more abroad . Some of the more well known companies are Metlife , Genworth , NY Life , Prudential , American General , ING , Transamerica and Northwestern Mutual . You know these companies because of their marketing budgets . In most cases these companies have higher premiums because they must of set their advertising budgets . There are several other lesser known life insurance companies like SBLI , Banner Life , Assurity , North American , Fidelity Security and AXA Equitible that usually a life insurance broker would know . These companies are just as good and financially sound as the more well known companies , they just do n't have the larger marketing budgets and rely on brokers to sell their policies . This usually translates into more affordable premiums to the consumer . I recommend contacting an independent broker to professionally shop for the best polices at the best rates for your unique situation .
Aflac life insurance is sold through American Family Life Assurance Company of Columbus and American Family Life Assurance Company of New York , with group policies sold through Continental American Insurance Company . Aflac and its companies were rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . They have been selling good term and permanent products since 1955 .
That is an excellent question ! The eventual collapse of Medicare and Medicaid has more than just economists worried . And I said eventual collapse , since I believe that it is much more likely that our current Government philosophy of income disparity politics will continue to prevent any kind of significant reform or refunding of those programs . Without overhauling , the system is predicted to bankrupt in 2024 . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- created a series of fat trimming cuts that in theory will add 5 years to the life of the programs . As of the 2012 Census statistics , 55 % of all seniors are currently at poverty level , and the statistics suggest that further cuts in just food stamps will double the currently 15 % of Americans living in poverty -LRB- 46.5 million households , and that number is woefully under estimated , as the formula for computing it is still based on 1963 data - bet you ca n't find a gallon of milk , or gas for what you paid in 1963 -RRB- . Jared Bernstein , a noted economist , calculates that the poverty rate will increase nearly 500 % when SSI tanks in 2030 . Now imagine the financial hardship on our Seniors , and our economy , when their medical expenses ca n't be paid for either . Something has to give , or we 'll be seeing our parents and grandparents out on the streets , or not at all . An interesting statistic ? 50 % of Americans combined own what the top 30 individual Americans do - $ 793 billion dollars . 47 % of Americans own nothing , their debt is equal to or greater than their assets . I 've been very blessed , God has been good to me and my family , but I 'm worried , and if you have parents or grandparents , you should be too , as millions of folks depend on it . Thanks for asking !
I think the real answer to your question is that no one knows for sure . Prior to the conclusion of the recent open enrollment period estimates ranged from somewhere in the 30 million to as high as 48 million Americans being uninsured . Certainly the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- has made some dent in this number but firm figures are difficult to obtain at this time -LRB- late April 2014 -RRB- and even the figures reported are subject to debate . If the goal of the Affordable Care Act was to eliminate Americans being uninsuredthen even the most optimistic enrollment figures of 10 million -LRB- when you include Medicaid expansion and young persons being able to stay on their parents policies until age 26 -RRB- show that we have fallen far short of eliminating the problem . And , some analysts do make the mistake of confusing enrollment with becoming insured and maintaining insurance coverage . Generally there is a 15 % to 20 % attrition rate in the individual marketplace for people who enroll but either fail to make their initial premium payment or discontinue paying -LRB- and thus their coverage -RRB- after a few months . There is little reason to think that the law will change human nature so the net impact on the number of uninsured Americans will probably be further diluted as the year progresses . When one takes into account that many enrollees being counted were previously insured under plans no longer compliant with the law 's requirements you have a fairly large amount of the enrollment really just being a transfer from one insured status to another . The end result is that there are fewer uninsured Americans today than there were a year ago but that number has not been reduced dramatically .
There are a lot of great companies out there when it comes to Critical Illness . Here are a few things you need to pay attention to . The first is the companies rating . This will help you determine the companies financial strength and the ability to pay claims . The second is know the features of the plan . Not all Critical Illness plans have the same benefits . Some offer a return of premium less any benefits paid , some have hospital indemnity and accident riders , and some have a larger scope of coverage for types of illnesses . A few of my favorite companies are Mutual of Omaha , Assurant Health , American General , and MetLife . Each company offers unique features and price points , but these are just a few that are out there . The last factor that needs to be taken into consideration is underwriting . If you have had Critical Illness before most companies will not accept you . However there are a few that will .
Here are a few of the 30 year guaranteed term life insurance companies : American General , American National , Ameritas , Aviva , Banner , Lincoln Benefit , Lincoln National , MetLife Investors , Nationwide , Principal , Protective , Pruco , Savings Bank , Security MTlNY , Transmerica , United Omaha . There are other companies who have guaranteed universal life that can be configured to perform like a 30 year term life insurance . Keep in mind that there are age limitations to 30 year guaranteed term life insurance .
The PPACA or better known as Obamacare is a mandatory federal program where all Americans are to participate or pay a penalty . The program begins in 2014 . All Americans will participate in Obamacare , but not all will pay the full premium or may not pay at all based on means testing . The middle class may receive some credits to offset the premium , but for many low or no income Americans , theyll simply pay nothing . Keep in mind that almost half the country does n't pay federal taxes , so any short fall generated from Obamacare will fall to federal tax payers .
AIG sells life insurance through its subsidiary American General . As you may or may not be aware , that AIG was bailed out through loans and stock ownership from the government . Since that time AIG has paid back all loans to the government and its subsidiary , American general , has enjoyed a resurgence in sales and brand recognition .
As an independent agent I sell from many different companies . It is hard to say what company is the best as it often depends on the individuals situation . I will say that for medically underwritten policies we sell quite a bit of American General , Genworth , and Prudential . Another interesting option is the no medical exam policies . Assurity , American National , and Sagicor have some very good options , though you will pay about 15 - 30 % more for the policies .
As of May , 2013 , the largest life insurance companies in the United States are MetLife , Inc , followed by Prudential Financial , followed by American International Group -LRB- American General -RRB- . Japan Post International is the largest life insurance company in the world , with AXA of France running a close second .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Accidental Life Insurance Cover Heart Attack ?
Does accidental life insurance cover a heart attack ? No , as a heart attack is actually a medical event , not an accident , even if it happens without warning . Accidental life policies tend to be cheap because they are known as situational plans . That is , a certain situation has to happen a certain way creating the death for the plan to pay .
No , accidental life insurance does not cover heart attack . It would most likely not even cover death due to an accident incurred while having a heart attack . If you have a pre-existing condition such as heart disease , it is important to get a policy that covers death due to illness as well as death by accident , which is what pure Life Insurance covers . Even if you can get $ 500,000 of accidental death coverage for the same price as $ 25,000 of life insurance , the life insurance is the better deal .
Accidental Life Insurance will only pay if the death was the result of an accident , it will not pay for a death due to natural causes . In most cases an accidental death is the result of some physical injury or trauma . Examples would be death from a car accident , falling off a roof , or being shot . Normally a heart attack would be the result of a medical condition -LRB- natural causes -RRB- and not the result of an accident . That being said , it is possible that a person could die of a heart attack that was the result of an accident . There could be a case where a person was skydiving and unable to open there parachute . This realization could trigger a heart attack causing the person to die before hitting the ground . This would be a case of a heart attack caused by an accident , not caused by natural causes .
Accidental Life Insurance policies will not cover heart attack , even if a heart attack was the cause of a fatal accident . To get coverage for death caused by heart attack or any other natural cause , you must purchase traditional Term or Permanent Life insurance . Life insurance covers death due to natural AND accidental causes .
No , accidental life insurance does not cover heart attack . It would most likely not even cover death due to an accident incurred while having a heart attack . If you have a pre-existing condition such as heart disease , it is important to get a policy that covers death due to illness as well as death by accident , which is what pure Life Insurance covers . Even if you can get $ 500,000 of accidental death coverage for the same price as $ 25,000 of life insurance , the life insurance is the better deal .
Does accidental life insurance cover a heart attack ? No , as a heart attack is actually a medical event , not an accident , even if it happens without warning . Accidental life policies tend to be cheap because they are known as situational plans . That is , a certain situation has to happen a certain way creating the death for the plan to pay .
Yes , most people who have had a heart attack and get life insurance . If you were under age 40 when you had your heart attack , you may need to settle for guaranteed issue or simplified issue life insurance . If your heart attack was at an older age , your heart function is still good , you have addressed any issues that led to the heart attack -LRB- CAD , diet , etc -RRB- , and several years have passed since having the heart attack , you should be able to get a medically underwritten policy . If you have just suffered your heart attack , your choices will be limited to graded policies for a few years . But you can get life insurance in most states .
Yes , most people can get life insurance after a heart attack . The type , quantity , and price of the life insurance that one can get after a heart attack depends on a number of variables . These include : The age at which the heart attack occurred -LRB- the older , the better , for life insurance purposes -RRB- . The severity of the heart attack . What treatment followed -LRB- bypass ? stent ? etc -RRB- . Whether the treatment was successful and there was not recurrence for several years . If healthy life habits were pursued -LRB- e.g. quit smoking , exercise regularly , etc -RRB- . Number of cardiac events . Ejection fraction of heart , stress test results , and other cardiac tests . If unable to get a medically underwritten policy , there are some simplified issue policies that simply ask if a heart attack has occurred in the past # of years . Your agent getting a full health history and being able to shop multiple carriers will ensure that you get the best life insurance rate post heart attack .
You should be able to get life insurance after a heart attack , but it can take a while until you are able to be approved for life insurance . Most nonmed policies require a waiting period of at least one year after a heart attack . Medically underwritten policies can be more lenient , or much stricter . That is because they look at the total picture : smoking status , weight , complicating health conditions such as diabetes , etc. . If the heart attack was an isolated incident and steps have been taken to prevent another one , one may be able to get life insurance shortly after suffering a heart attack . If the whole health picture is unfavorable , the person who had the heart attack may need to take guaranteed issued life insurance . Normally , the case is middle ground , so finding a life insurance agent that specializes in heart disease can be very helpful .
There really is not a type of life insurance called Accidental Life insurance , although that is not a bad title because many people who buy it `` accidentally '' believe that it is Life insurance . Accidental Death insurance is a policy that will pay the beneficiary if the insured person dies as the result of an accident . Accidental death is death `` caused by an unforeseen circumstance unrelated to the body '' . Therefore , an accidental death policy would not pay , e.g. , for a traffic fatality that occurred due to a heart attack while driving .
Life insurance will pay the face amount in case of death due to heart attack . If the heart attack was a pre-existing condition at the time of application , the applicant will need to visit with a good impaired risk agent to find a policy for which he qualifies . If heart attack was severe or within a year , he may need to take a simplified issue policy with a limited face amount , but there is usually some type of life insurance that will cover heart attack .
I believe you 're referring to AD&D policies -LRB- accidental death and dismemberment -RRB- . Every life insurance policy covers accidental death . Traditional life insurance policies provide full coverage -LRB- paying out proceeds in the event death occurs by illness or injury -RRB- . Partial coverage policies only covering accidental deaths are known as Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- life insurance programs . These policies typically feature much lower premiums than full coverage programs , but only pay out a death benefit if death occurs under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. dying in a car accident -RRB- . If you only have an AD&D policy and you die due to a heart attack , the policy would not pay out any proceeds because that would be considered death due to illness . Even though the premiums are less with AD&D policies , it 's worth paying the premiums for a full coverage life insurance policy because individuals are most likely to die due to illness than they will by injury .
Every life insurance policy covers accidental death . Traditional life insurance policies provide full coverage -LRB- paying out proceeds in the event death occurs by illness or injury -RRB- . Partial coverage policies only covering accidental deaths are known as Accidental Death & Dismemberment life insurance programs . These policies typically feature much lower premiums than full coverage programs , but only pay out a death benefit if death occurs under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. dying in a car accident -RRB- . If you only have an AD&D policy and you die due to a heart attack , the policy would not pay out any proceeds because that would be considered death due to illness . Even though the premiums are less with AD&D policies , it 's worth paying the premiums for a full coverage life insurance policy because individuals are most likely to die due to illness than they will by injury .
Life insurance differs from AD&D in that Life Insurance pays for death by any reason , whereas AD&D only pays for death by accidental reasons . AD&D stands for Accidental Death and Dismemberment . If the death is due to falling down stairs , car accident , etc , the policy will pay the death benefit . And some policies also pay for the loss of an extremity . But if death was due to illness -LRB- even an accident caused by illness , such as driving into a tree while suffering a heart attack -RRB- , the policy will not pay . Life insurance covers both types of death : natural and accidental .
You can get life insurance after a heart attack . However , that is just a blanket statement . There are a lot of factors to consider before purchasing a life insurance policy . An underwriter will want to know the details of your heart attack including the date , damage to the heart muscle , limitations in daily routines , change of diet , exercise , any medications , etc. . The underwriter will also want to know the cause of the heart attack , blockage , stress , HBP , etc. . Once all of these factors are determined then you will shop for your best offers . I highly recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker who can shop multiple companies and speak to underwriters in advance for your best options . Applying for multiple companies can cause a lot of unnecessary hits to your MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- report , which can and will cause you issues in the future when applying for other types of insurance . Good luck !
That is a great question ! Your basic life insurance policy will cover any reason for what may cause your demise . Something like an accidental death policy is n't so good , as you have to pass from or as a result of , an accident . So you have a heart attack - your life policy would pay , your accidental death policy would not . You get bitten by a spider , have an allergic reaction , and meet your maker , life pays , accident does n't . You get into a car wreck , both would pay . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
In order to get life insurance after heart surgery , you will usually need to wait at least a year -LRB- unless you are buying guaranteed issued life insurance , which can be issued right away but will have a graded period of at least two years before it pays 100 % -RRB- . Once a year or two is passed , you can get simplified issue life insurance in most states . These may or may not be graded and do have a fairly low minimum face amount -LRB- usually $ 50,000 or less -RRB- . If your heart surgery was a one time event , if you did not have a heart attack -LRB- or the heart attack was mild -RRB- , you now follow a heart healthy lifestyle , and if enough time has passed without event that you have been able to go off blood thinners , you should be able to get a medically underwritten policy . Even if not all these conditions are met , you may be able to get a medically underwritten policy with a `` flat extra '' for some years . Contact an impaired risk agency who understands life insurance for those with a history of heart disease to get your most affordable rate .
Accidental death insurance policies are generally pretty specific . In other words accidental death policies do not cover `` natural causes '' or death caused by illness , heart attack , stroke and the like . In fact there 's usually a time limit within which a person must die as a result of an accident in order to be covered by the policy . So if a person is critically injured in an accident , but lives beyond the time limit then dies as a result of the injuries , the policy will not cover the death .
Basic Life Insurance cover death by any reason . This means that the Insured person could pass away from illness , accident , or `` old age '' and the policy would pay the death benefit to the beneficiary . AD&D stands for Accidental Death and Dismember insurance . As the title says , it only pays in circumstances that result from accidental death or loss of limbs . Even an accident that is caused by illness -LRB- such as being in a fatal car wreck due to having a heart attack while driving -RRB- will not be covered .
Hybrid Life Insurance refers to a type of policy that is a blend of two types of coverage . E.g. . A blend of Term and Whole Life , or Term and Universal Life , or Universal Life and Long Term Care . Hybrid Term Life is also the name of a policy offered by Fidelity Life . It starts out as a blend of Life and Accidental Death coverage , then changes to all Life insurance after the Insured person takes an exam within 6 months . The advantage of starting out with the hybrid policy -LRB- which goes into effect almost immediately -RRB- , vs binding coverage with other policies , is that the Insured gets to keep the policy regardless of whether or not they are approved for the pure Life policy later . In fact , the Insured could have a heart attack or be diagnosed with cancer and still get to keep that blend of Life and Accidental Death that is not graded . Another advantage can be for those who need something quick . E.g. . They are going on a trip , or need a policy to satisfy a divorce decree , or get a loan , or to wait until their blood pressure medication kicks in . If they do go on to get the pure Life policy , the rates are quite competitive with other medically underwritten policies . The only downside I see with Fidelity 's Hybrid Term Life Insurance is that it is hard to explain and understand .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Often Will Medicare Pay For A New Bed ? 5 Years Or 7 Years ?
First please note that the bed must be prescribed by your physician as medically necessary . Once the bed has been received , my research shows that Medicare will only cover replacement equipment if your doctor writes you a new order or prescription with an explanation of the medical need .
Health insurance is intended to pay for items that are medically necessary . No matter how much better a new mattress may be for any medical condition one may have , you would be hard pressed to find a physician that is going to prescribe a new bed and deem it medically necessary . And , even if you found a doctor to write such a prescription , you are going to have a very difficult time convincing an insurance company this was an true medical need , as opposed to something to help you sleep better . If you are covered by Medicare , and prescribe a hospital bed , that is covered under Medicare Part B as durable medical equipment , with you being responsible for buying 20 % of the Medicare-approved cost of a hosptial bed after your deductible has been met .
Guidelines for what type of bed Medicare will pay for varies by state . In all states , Medicare will not pay for the cost of a fully electric bed . However , Medicare will pay for the cost of a semi-electric bed when there is a medical necessity for that type of bed . You can then pay for the difference so that you can purchase a fully electric bed , if desired .
You can generally withdraw money from an annuity at any time . However , you may be subject to a penalty and taxes . Annuities are generally meant to be long-term or at least a specified term such as 5 , 7 , 10 or more years . Each contact will have rules on how much you can take out annually without any penalty . Often it is 10 percent per year , after the first year . If you withdraw above the penalty-free withdrawal amount , you will pay a penalty . This annuity schedule is part of the contract and if you have questions about how to interpret , contact the agent that sold you the annuity or another qualified agent . Taxes will likely apply to any withdrawals at your ordinary income tax rate for that year . Also remember that if your annuity is a non-qualified account -LRB- not a Roth or IRA -RRB- and you withdraw prior to age 591/2 , the first dollars you withdraw will be considered your gain and be taxed at whatever your ordinary tax rate is for that year . There are ways to avoid the penalty -LRB- not the tax -RRB- for the withdrawal under section 72 -LRB- t -RRB- of the IRS code but you would have to agree to take level distributions until age 591/2 or for 5 years , whichever is longer . If you do n't follow this rule , you will be subject to a 10 % penalty going back to when you started early withdrawals from your annuity . Annuities can be a great product when the `` fit '' is correct . Your agent should make sure it is suitable upfront for your specific needs so you can avoid getting into an early withdrawal situation .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed when a doctor prescribes use of the bed as being medically necessary and when the person needing the bed is covered by Medicare Part B. To qualify for the care as medically necessary , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You can not change positions in a normal bed 2 -RRB- You need that type of bed to change positions for pain relief 3 -RRB- You need to sleep with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees for medical reasons 4 -RRB- You need traction equipment that must be attached to a hospital bed
Insurers typically use insurance scores not credit scores , but they are in-bedded with some of the same information . For most insurers this is one way of measuring your responsibility . Responsibility is a key ingredient in knowing if you understand what risks you are taking . Let me give you an example . Suppose you want to hand the keys of a new Ferrari over to a 16 year old . An insurer is going to look at that and say . . wait a minute , does that driver know how to drive such a powerful and expensive car . Will he or she give someone else the keys and let them drive . will he or she be using the car for delivery of Pizzas . All of those things might require a specific answer . Yet insurance scores give an insurer information on how you have acted in variety of situations and credit is part of that shorthand that conveys to an insurer that you are or are not a generally responsible person . The most accurate measure of how you will drive is how often you will drive . So be sure to add that element to your discussion with an agent . He or she may have polices from insurers who give discounts to those who use a vehicle say less than 4.000 mile s a year . Talk to your agent and give him or her enough information to be able to accurately present you and your exposures to many companies .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare has specific fees for DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including wheel chairs , walkers and hospital beds . DME supplies are covered under Medicare Part B . You should always use a Medicare approved DME supplier and make sure they accept assignment . The hospital bed requires a doctors prescription . Your DME supplier can give you an idea of how much Medicare will pay toward the cost of renting a bed .
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
A 5 year Term Life Insurance policy has the rate locked in for 5 years . In my experience , the premiums for 5 year Term policies often exceed the premiums for 10 year Term , because there are far fewer companies that offer 5 year Term . If you purchase a 10 year Term policy and only want to keep it 5 years , you can simply cancel it after 5 years with no penalty .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed under `` durable medical equipment '' . If you need an adjustable bed please discuss this with your doctor and alert them that you are going to purchase a bed and the company selling the bed will bill medicare so you can ask the doctor if he will certify it as being medically necessary
Just as the name sounds , a 5 year term insurance policy only guarantees the premiums will remain the same for the first 5 years - after that the policy becomes annually renewable and the premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- . Many companies feature a minimum 10 year policy and the rates are often cheaper to secure a 10 year term policy than a 5 year policy . Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure is commonly seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis -RRB- .
Bad dog ! Fido ! How could you do that ? No Beggin Strips for you for a year and you can forget about that brand new diamond-studded flea collar . And ... you 're sleeping in the garage tonight , not in your bed upstairs ! OK ... Back to the question . Often , the liability portion of your policy covers damage that your pet may have caused to other persons outside of your home .
In California the answer is anabsoluteyes . California is governed by proposition 103guidelinesand one of the major rating factors is driving record . Every personal lines auto insurance carrier must rate according to your driving record so 1 point will have an impact . This impact can be quite significant . 2 points in a 3 year period and you are no longer considered a California a good driver . This can cause rates to easily double in many cases . I often see clients who move in from out of state who have points on their driving record get a big shock to find out there rates areaffectedby a ticket . So what is a point you may ask . Any minor moving violation is 1 point . A major moving violation can be 2 points with a DUI coming in at 4 points . A minor at-fault accident is 1 point . A at-fault accident that includes bodily injury is 2 points . You may attend traffic school for a minor violation in most areas once every 18 months . All the rest you just have to wait out the 3 years until the points drop off your record . Also some insurance carriers reward drivers for clean driving records that go beyond 3 years so even though your points may have dropped off you still may not be receiving the best rates possible until 5-7 years . And by the way , Insurance carriers in California will check the driving record once a year minimum if not more often . If you move from one carrier to the next an upfront motor vehicle record is always ran .
It depends on how the contract is setup . There is premium off-set where the cash value pays the remaining premium to maturity after a number of years . I usually build policies that will off-set at age 60 . There is a paid-up or limited pay policy that can be 5 years , 7 years , 10 years or whatever years you want it to be . There is also paid up at 65 or at whatever designated age . Whole life from reputable companies can be built to be as flexible as possible given that the base premium is paid .
Yes , whole life does accumulate a cash value . However , depending on how your life insurance agent set up your premiums it can take a few years . Usually the first 5 to 7 years are paying for the cost of insurance and the cash will accumulate very slowly in early years . There is a page in your whole life policy called the illustrations page . This is a chart of cash value from year to year of the cash value accumulation .
Hospital beds are considered durable medical goods and are covered under Medicare Part B . If you can prove that the hospital bed is medically necessary and you have Medicare Part B then the cost of the hospital bed will be covered under medicare .
In some situations you may qualify for special beds and or mattresses . If you are completely immobile , or have a tendency towards bed sores , Medicare Part B may authorize payment for a special bed or mattress . Best to ask your doctor for advice on this matter . Be sure to use a Medicare approved DME provider and one that accepts assignment .
First please note that the bed must be prescribed by your physician as medically necessary . Once the bed has been received , my research shows that Medicare will only cover replacement equipment if your doctor writes you a new order or prescription with an explanation of the medical need .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is Health Insurance Stop Loss ?
A stop loss means exactly what it implies , `` it stops your loss '' and the insurance carrier picks up all other costs during that calendar year . For individuals that have health insurance a stop loss is also known as the annual out-of-pocket maximum . After you reach the out-of-pocket maximum in a calendar year the insurance carrier pays the rest of the claims . In a self-insurance situation where a company pays the claims up to a certain dollar amount the `` stop loss '' is the most the employer will pay in any year after which the insurance carrier will pay the remaining claims .
Some people use the term `` stop loss '' to mean `` maximum out-of-pocket exposures '' which is the point in a person 's health insurance policy when they 've met their deductible and any co-insurance cost sharing and the health insurance carrier becomes 100 % responsible for all health care costs after that point . Technically this is an incorrect use of the term . Stop loss traditionally refers to reinsurance arrangements within self-insured group health insurance plans . There are two types of stop loss insurance , specific and aggregate . Specific stop loss insurance protects the group plan from claims exposure above a certain point for any insured person in the group . For example , a $ 50,000 specific stop loss policy means the employer accepts the risk for the first $ 50,000 in claims on an individual and after that point the reinsurance carrier pays the rest of the cost . Aggregate stop loss insurance protects the employer from claims liability for the entire insured group above a certain point . A $ 1 million aggregate stop loss policy means the employer accepts the liability for the first $ 1 million in claims for their entire insured group , if the group 's claims exceed this limit then the aggregate reinsurance carrier pays the rest of the cost .
A stop loss means exactly what it implies , `` it stops your loss '' and the insurance carrier picks up all other costs during that calendar year . For individuals that have health insurance a stop loss is also known as the annual out-of-pocket maximum . After you reach the out-of-pocket maximum in a calendar year the insurance carrier pays the rest of the claims . In a self-insurance situation where a company pays the claims up to a certain dollar amount the `` stop loss '' is the most the employer will pay in any year after which the insurance carrier will pay the remaining claims .
Stop loss is normally a term used in self funded employer group health plans but I have heard the phrase used to describe traditional major medical plans as well . Your stop loss is the point where -LRB- at least in theory -RRB- your liability for paying out of pocket ceases and the carrier pays 100 % of future covered claims . This only works in a practical matter in the case of a high deductible health plan -LRB- HDHP -RRB- where eligible claims are covered at 100 % once the deductible is satisfied . If you have a copay plan you can satisfy your major medical deductible and then hit your out of pocket coinsurance limit -LRB- stop loss -RRB- but still be responsible for paying claims for doctor visits , Rx and other items .
How about today ? There are many creative ways to fund your life insurance policy . Lets suppose you have term insurance with 10 years left on the premium guarantee . You could , of course , just keep paying the premium for those 10 years . If the carrier doesnt get those 10 years of premium payments , you will lose the coverage . Is there any way you could stop paying but still retain the guarantee ? Yes , there is . You might be able to use a single premium immediate annuity to fund the policy . Make one payment into the annuity , and the annuity will , in turn , pay your insurance premium for you . Depending on your age and other factors , the amount of money you put into that annuity could very well be substantially less than the total premium you would end up paying for the next 10 years . This way you could stop making premium payments after that one annuity contribution , but still retain your guaranteed coverage . Now lets suppose you have a universal life policy . I am sure you know that this is a flexible premium product . You could overpay , underpay , and even stop paying . Of course , you need to know what you are doing here to make sure you will have the coverage you need for as long as you need it . Given that , you might be able to plop one lump sum into that policy now and never have to make another payment and still get the guarantees you want . All you need is for the carrier to do a simple calculation and illustration for you . Here again , you could stop making payments but still retain the coverage . There are many ways to skin a cat , as they say . Not that I think cats should be skinned at all - but you know what I mean :-RRB-
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
The official name for `` ObamaCare '' is the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- . It is also commonly referred to as Obama care , health care reform and the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- was signed into law to reform the health care industry by President Barack Obama on March 23 , 2010 and upheld by the supreme court on On June 28 , 2012 . The goal of healthcare reform is to give more Americans access to affordable , quality health insurance and to reduce the growth in health care spending in the U.S. . The fact is healthcare reform and the newly opened exchanges do not replace private insurance , Medicare , or Medicaid . If you have health coverage you like , you can keep it . Many of the ACA 's numerous provisions have already been enacted . The rest of the program starts in 2013-2014 and continues to roll out until 2022 . Healthcare reform offers a number of new benefits , rights and protections including the requirement that all new health insurance plans cover preventive services and provide new essential health benefits , this includes everything from yearly check-ups , to maternity care , to mental health , to mammograms and colonoscopies , at no out-of-pocket costs . In addition the ACA includes provisions that let young adults stay on their plan until 26 , stop insurance companies from dropping you when you are sick or if you make an honest mistake on your application , prevent against gender discrimination , stop insurance companies from making unjustified rate hikes , do away with life-time and annual limits , and require all insurers to cover people with pre-existing conditions .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
Stopping a term life insurance policy is fairly easy . The best and preferred way to stop coverage is to write your life insurance company requesting to cancel . All correspondence must be in writing to protect both parties , never just call and cancel . You will receive a confirmation . Most life insurance companies will allow you to reinstate , or change your mind , up to 180 days by paying back premiums . After that time period you will have to reapply for coverage . The second way to cancel a term life policy is to stop paying your premiums . The policy will lapse after your 31 day grace period . While this method is maybe the easiest , you will receive a lot of correspondence from the carrier , warning the lapse of your policy . It is always best just to write , mail , scan or fax your request and be done .
If I am understanding it correctly you are asking about the compressors and not the overall system that uses the same duct work as your heating system . If that is not correct I apologize , but that is what I think you are referring to . In which case you are asking if a failed compressor is covered under your policy.The answer is it depends on what caused it to stop working . If it is hit by lightning , then that is typically covered . If it stops because it just reaches an age where it will no longer operate , the answer is no .
Paid up value in life insurance is a non-forfeiture provision which is found in most classic whole life insurance policies . Non-forfeitureprovisions are a series of values found within a life policy that give you options if you want to stop making premium payments on your policy . These options are : Cash Surrender : Giving up or selling your policy back to the insurance company for the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy over the years you own it . These values are stated on a chart called Non-forfeiture Provisions contained within your policy . Extended Term Insurance : This provides for the continuation of the full face amount of your policy for a specified period of time based on the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy . The length of time is stated in the same chart listed as non-forfeiture provisions . Paid-up Insurance Value : This provision also is included the the chart of Non-forfeiture provisions and it lists the new face amount of insurance you can elect if you stop making premium payments for the policy . It is based on the cash surrender value of the policy at the time you stop making premium payments . Depending on the length of time the policy is in force this amount may equal the full face amount of the policy , and this amount will be in force for the rest of your life . There are policies that can be purchased with a date where the policy is fully paid up , such as a 20 year payment life , or a life paid up at age 65 . Generally these policies spread a lifetime of premium payments over a shorter period of time making the premium payments slightly more than a traditional whole life policy where premium payments are paid for the life of the insured , and are typically known as a limited payment life policy .
how to compare individual health insurance plans ? Well , the way I do it is by review of features . You review deductibles , co insurance , out of pocket maximums , office call provisions . The ACA has standardized many aspects of health insurance as far as minimum coverage , so all plans will have the same basics . The big thing is compare out of pocket maximum or stop loss in a plan . This represents in the worst case what you would have to pay .
The best type of health insurance really depends on your circumstances . For example , generally healthy individuals with additional cash on hand are often best suited by High Deductible Health Insurance Plans as they can cover the high deductible if in the rare chance they should require considerable health care . The deductible acts as a stop loss against their total risk of expense exposure . Individuals with less cash on hand , and or those with medical conditions that require more frequent trips to the doctor are generally better suited by Managed Health Care systems like Heath Maintenance Organizations or Preferred Provider Organizations with low deductibles and/or co-pays .
With Term life insurance , if you stop paying premiums for over one month , the policy will lapse . To get that same policy back you have to fill out a reinstatement application saying that your health has not changed , and you have to pay back premiums to when you quit paying them . If your health has changed or you are unable/unwilling to pay that amount , you will need to apply for a new policy . There is no cash value and no surrender charge . When you stop paying the premium for cash value product such as Whole life or Universal life , the cash in the policy may pay the premiums until the cash value runs out . If you would rather take the cash value out in cash , or roll it over into another policy , or change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , you must contact your agent or the life insurance company and give them those instructions .
You can stop term life insurance in one of two ways . First , you could just stop paying premiums . The policy will go into it 's grace period then lapsing after that , about 30 days . The second is to write a letter to the insurance company notifying them of your intentions effective and a date you choose . I always caution people about canceling any life insurance . You will most likely pay more premiums when you go to apply for more insurance . Also , insurability could be an issue if your health is worse at the time of application or the history has issues in it .
COBRA beneficiaries generally are eligible for coverage a maximum of 18 months . There are certain qualifying events that could extend the coverage . If the beneficiary stops paying the premium or if the employer stops providing the group health insurance the coverage could end earlier . Some plans offer a conversion from the COBRA plan to an individual plan at the end of the COBRA period .
A Medicare Supplement or Medigap policy is one very important option for people on Medicare . The main job of a Medigap plan is to act as a stop-loss policy for standard Medicare A and B. For someone with only standard Medicare , there is no maximum out of pocket amount that you can spend on your medical treatment . For instance , if you have a procedure that costs $ 250,000 , you would owe $ 50,000 . With a Medigap policy , that amount would be reduced and max out at a certain point . Depending on your health , your finances , and how much of a loss you 're willing to deal with , different Medigap policies -LRB- or Medicare Advantage policies -RRB- fit best for different people . Talk to a independent broker licensed in your state about your specific situation .
Individual and group health insurance policies can be terminated essentially at any time by the policyholder . The correct manner is to send in a written notice of termination to your health insurance carrier that states the date of termination . Generally the date of termination should be for a date after you are sending in the termination notice . For example , you send in a letter on June 5th notifying the insurance carrier of your intent to terminate coverage effective July 1st . Attempting to terminate your coverage in a retroactive manner is more problematic and should be avoided if at all possible . First of all , if premiums have already been paid for the period you are wanting to backdate your coverage to the insurance carrier will be within their rights to hold on to your premium and to check if any claims activity has occurred during that period . Even in this electronic age a claim may not be filed immediately after services are rendered and the insurance carrier has to be mindful of this lag time . For this reason a request for a retroactive termination will certainly be delayed and if any claims activity came in during that period the request for a retroactive termination would most likely be denied and granted for the fist of the next month . Then there is the less graceful way of cancelling your coverage and that is simply not to make your premium payment . Failure to pay is a violation of your individual or group contract terms and will lead to contract cancellation by the insurance carrier . I do not recommend this approach as it is bad personal and/or business practice . Also , most individual health insurance contracts and an increasing number of group health plans are set up on an automatic bank draft basis . Failure to provide a notice of termination will not stop this automatic draft from being drawn from your account . Sometimes people put a `` stop pay '' order for the draft on their bank account , for which you have to pay the bank a fee , and then from the insurance carrier 's perspective when they attempt to make the monthly payment draft this is no different than getting a bounced check so they will still attempt to collect payment while adding a late payment charge onto the premium . This situation can get quite messy and end up taking more of your time to resolve than simply sending in a termination notice .
Medicare Supplement Plan J was a good plan , however , it is no longer offered in any state . Medicare Supplement Insurance Plans can not vary by state . If they stop offering Plan J in one state then they stop in all states . Any person who still has a Plan J can keep that plan the rest of their life if they would like . However , with no new premium coming in from new customers the only way insurance companies can deal with rising healthcare costs will be to raise the premiums on Plan J . It would make sense for someone with Plan J to compare plans to see what is available . Plan F is the most similar to Plan J but Plan G is also something to consider .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Will Auto Insurance Cover Mechanical Repairs ?
If you have an endorsement on your policy that covers towing and roadside assistance then there is a possibility that a repair may be covered . Towing and roadside assistance coverage is typically very limited though . I would suggest reading your policy completely to understand the coverage offered and the exclusions contained within or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
It depends upon why your transmission needed to be repaired . A motor vehicle warranty and extended warranties cover material defects and mechanical breakdowns . The warranty may be limited by time and mileage . Auto insurance covers vehicle repairs resulting from accidents . Collision covers damages resulting from accidents while you are driving the vehicle . Comprehensive coverage pays for damages caused by external forces : flood , tree falling on car , etc. . Your auto policy may or may not have these optional coverage features .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Great question ! Your insurance company considers your car totaled when the cost of repairing it is close to , or higher than it 's blue book or their estimated value . Once the car is considered totaled , the company will send you a check for the amount specified by your policy , and the adjuster 's estimates . The amount they have determined will be minus the amount of your deductible , and any amount that you may owe them . In most cases , the company will own the rights to the car , and will sell it for salvage , or at auction to mechanics willing to repair the vehicle . I hope that you never have to find out , but if you do , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! The answer is simple , the cost of your auto insurance for your imported car is higher because the cost to repair it , should you damage it , is more expensive than a domestically made car would cost . The expense for parts and the specialized mechanics would cost the insurance company more , so they pass that expense on to you . Thanks for asking !
Auto policies , like all insurance policies cover specified perils . That means that if the policy covers loss due to flood , such damage to a transmission would be covered . Auto policies do not cover maintenance of the mechanical portion of the car . If the loss was the result of maintenance , it wouldnt be covered . If the damage to the transmission was the result of a collision it would be part of the adjustment of the claim .
Possibly if your policy carries and endorsement for breakdowns or the mechanical problem is the direct result of a covered loss . Many auto insurance carriers offer road side assistance endorsements to their policies that provide some limited coverage for mechanical breakdowns . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions there may be .
That is a great question ! Generally , your auto insurance company will have a contract or agreement with a local garage , mechanic , and body shop . They will refer you to them to have your work done . By doing this , they have an agreement with the garages to keep costs under control . Should you choose to use a different mechanic , you are certainly welcome to , but my experience has been that the insurance company is much more difficult to work with . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! If you are an invaluable part of your companies success , I 'd not be surprised to hear that they have a key person policy on you ! This type of policy is purchased by an employer , or business partner when the loss of that employee would have a great impact on the financial stability of the company . For example , let 's say that you are a mechanic that specializes in repairing imported sportscars , you are really good at it and have developed quite a lot of clients that come to you , and your company relies heavily on that income you generate . They may take out a policy for the event that you pass , and the business suffers financially from the loss of your clientele until they find a replacement for you . The company is the owner , the beneficiary , and pays the premiums in this type of policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
A renters insurance policy is not a maintenance policy or a warranty . In other words renters insurance will not cover a broken anything if it 's mechanical in nature . For a claim to be covered the incident first will need to fall under sudden and accidental . Then the incident will also have to fall under the perils of the policy of which mechanical breakdown is not one of them .
Homeowners policies cover your `` dwelling '' and that would include any service equipment which is physically attached to the dwelling including boilers used to provide heat . Assuming you have a standard Homeowner Policy Form # 3 or its ' equivalent or better , the boiler would be covered for `` risk of direct loss '' unless specifically limited or excluded . You will find an exclusion for any loss `` caused by '' wear and tear , mechanical breakdown and such but note this exclusion does n't exclude any loss `` resulting from '' mechanical breakdown or wear and tear to your boiler . So I would conclude your homeowner 's policy should provide coverage for your boiler should it be damaged from some external cause and also for damage `` resulting from '' any internal cause .
If damage to the unit was caused by fire , wind , lightning/hail or some other peril provided under your policy it would be covered-minus your deductible . If the unit had a mechanical breakdown you would need to have an endorsement on the policy for `` mechanical breakdown '' to have coverage afforded . Having said that , if the unit broke and caused damage to the home you would likely have coverage for the resultant damage caused by the unit . Hope this helps !
If your father has a Humana Medicare Advantage Plan I feel confident in telling you the answer to your question is No . If your father has a Medicare Supplement policy he may get Medicare under Part B to pay some on his chair . Certainly not the whole cost of the chair . Medicare will only cover the seat lift mechanism not the chair itself . In order for Medicare to pay for the seat lift mechanism the doctor prescribing the chair must justify to Medicare that the lift chair is medically necessary . That is easier said than done with Medicare .
Yes Life Isurance is a very wise decision and will eventually prove itself in the later years . Insurance in general is a financial mechanism that is designed to indemnify loss and to make a person financially whole again . Life Insurance is a wealth accumulating mechanism that if anything should happen suddenly to anyone that is relied upon for income the death benefits are used to replace income needed examples are funeral payments , bills at home , money for children 's future , etc. . This also helps to bring wealth into a family for generations to come . All is paid lump sum tax free .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
A renters policy will cover a computer that is damaged by one of the covered risks . If the computer is broken because it simply no longer operates , that is probably not a covered risk . A covered risk would be fire damage , lightning damage , or something like that . Some computer manufacturers provide warranties and extended warranties to cover mechanical failures .
Typically your auto insurance would not cover common road hazards , such as a nail in your tire without having an endorsement on your policy for mechanical breakdown or similar coverage . If you have full coverage on your vehicle then other than collision -LRB- comprehensive -RRB- coverage may provide some coverage less the policy deductible in the event of a rock hitting your windshield or such . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
The process of getting a quote on auto insurance is brief . To turn the quote into a policy takes a little more time but the whole transaction can be done in less than 20 minutes . In many cases all you need is your name , birthdate and address . The insurance company can often detect the description of every car in your household and the names and drivers information on ever resident . Retrieving MVRs and losses is also quite mechanized now .
Medicare covers 3 types of `` lift chairs '' -3 position , infinite lift , and zero gravity . Medicare only pays for the `` lifting mechanism '' . Each company may cover this item in varying degrees . I would suggest that you go the dealer you wish to purchase this item through and let them interface with your insurance company to tell you how much your company is going to cover and how much you will have to pay . The possibility of medicare covering this item in full is small
My auto insurance policy recently paid a claim for my transmission , even though it was not accident related . Check your policy to see if you purchased a mechanical failure rider . The rider extends the manufacturers new car warranty . Many people , like me , forget what coverage features they elect when buying a policy . It definitely pays to review your policy declarations page for opportunities to file claims .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Take Out Life Insurance On My Spouse ?
You can own a life insurance policy on anyone , including your spouse . In most cases your spouse must agree to the insurance , make application and qualify medically . Some carriers issue policies that can be applied for without the insureds knowledge or consent . You can be the beneficiary of your spouse 's life insurance as long as there is an insurable interest -LRB- which is almost always the case -RRB- .
Can you take out an insurance policy on my spouse ? Yes , you can , the issue would be how much in coverage you 're applying for and if consent is needed . There are some group life situations or credit group life situations where a small death benefit can be signed up for without your spouses knowledge . Usually something like a $ 1,000 to $ 15,000 in face amount . A larger amount purchased on an individual basis does require spousal consent to be covered .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
The Insured person and policy Owner are required to sign the life insurance application , so if one spouse is taking out a policy on the other , both need to sign . If a married person takes out a policy for which he/she is both Owner and Insured , the spouse does not have to sign the application . If the spouse is POA , Guardian , or other legal representative for the Insured person , the spouse may need to sign for the Insured . Another situation in which a spouse might need to sign is if the Owner or Beneficiary of the policy is a trust for which the spouse is a Trustee .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Yes ! One of the primary points of getting life insurance after getting married is for income protection purposes so your spouse can maintain the same lifestyle for a given amount of time without having to worry about financial matters . When a family loses an income stream due to the death of a spouse , the surviving spouse often has to make a dramatic shift in lifestyle choices with no way to have that income immediately replaced - this can be everything from losing your house because the income is not there to pay the mortgage , to pay off the car loans , credit card debts -LRB- which can increase rapidly in this case as it 's a quick source for people to delay paying immediate bills , but draws substantially large interest rate charges and can put that person into even bigger debt -RRB- . This is where life insurance comes in . Instead of using 100 % of your own money , you use someone else 's -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- so your spouse does n't have to worry about financial matters so heavily right after the death of a loved one . For income replacement purposes , you ideally want to have at least a 5-7x income value so if you are making $ 100,000 per year , you want to have at least $ 500,000 - $ 700,000 of coverage for that type of purpose . As noted earlier , you would then add in other debts you do n't want your spouse to have to worry about such as mortgage , cars , credit cards , etc. . Term insurance works great for taking care of the mortgage and other temporary expenses because you may only need coverage for those items for a specified number of years -LRB- e.g. 20 year or 30 years -RRB- . A great idea for people is to create a step-down process where you have a larger amount of coverage in the immediate and a lower amount in later years when the larger amount of coverage may not be needed at that future point . This can help reduce costs for coverage and use the savings in premiums towards other avenues such as retirement planning , investments , savings , etc. . If you would like to go over this information in further detail , discuss your life insurance needs , and any other questions you may have , please feel free contact me by clicking on the button next to my picture and I will be happy to help . I do not charge any fees for my services and my group is licensed with over 50 insurance companies to compare rates through . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much for your question .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
It is usually permissible to take out life insurance on your spouse . Because most couples live together and share expenses and income , they have a financial interest in each other 's lives . That is what the underwriter looks at when determining whether you can take out a policy on your spouse . Life insurance underwriters also take into consideration how much coverage you have on yourself , and possibly may ask your reason for owning your spouse 's policy . Your spouse must give consent by signing the application .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
The death of a spouse is perhaps the most emotionally traumatic event which humans experience . What would you do if your spouse died unexpectedly ? In over 55 % of married-couple families today , both marriage partners work outside the home at least part time . -LRB- 1 -RRB- Often the financial requirements to run the household substantially exceed the income of either spouse alone . If an untimely death were to occur , the inability to meet financial obligations with the single remaining spouses income might require the hasty sale of assets or , even worse , a bank foreclosure on the family residence . Life insurance is an excellent means of providing money when it is needed in these traumatic moments . Some families are fortunate enough to allow either the mother or father to stay home with small children while the other earns sufficient cash to meet household and living expenses . It is obvious that the loss of a breadwinner would create a financial calamity . Couples should consider the potential cost of replacing the services of the spouse who stays at home to care for the children . Without the deceased spouse , a surviving spouse working outside the home would face new expenditures for child care , either in the home or at a babysitter or day care center as well as someone to take the children to the doctor , dentist , piano lessons , etc. . Perhaps the surviving parent could take time off work to fulfill these obligations , but this time off work would also amount to a financial loss . Most families can help effectively remove this potential financial emergency by acquiring a life insurance policy on each spouse . Source : Statistical Abstract of the United States : 2012 , Table 700 Married-Couple Families ; data from 2009 . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance do I need ? '' Well , you need to take all your financial obligations in indebtedness , all your future obligations like college , retirement , other areas that you think that you want to talk about or even charitable intent . You need to take all those totals , plus the loss of income . Because if I 'm not there to generate income , what happens to my spouse or my family ? I need to be able to generate income for them to live on . So what I 'm looking at , all the ideas of `` How much do I need ? '' I want to take all these areas into consideration ; financial indebtedness , future obligations , maybe some charitable intent , and to replace the income from the person who 's died . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
At LifeQuotes.com we like to have applicants articulate why they want life insurance to make sure that we recommend the right policy from among our 35 life insurers . Important questions to answer are : Why do I think I need life insurance ? Who should get what if I die ? Who are my current dependents ? What is my current and future debt situation ? By when will I have no dependents in my life that I am responsible for ? What would my spouse do or live on if I died ?
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is A Money Purchase Retirement Plan ?
A money purchase plan is a form of qualified retirement plan that requires the employer to make contributions to the plan on an employees behalf . This required contribution is generally determined as a percentage of employee annual income and is the same for all eligible employees -LRB- i.e. employees that are part of the plan -RRB- . The alternative to this is a profit sharing plan , where funds can be distributed to a plan -LRB- if profits exist -RRB- and are distributed among employees . This contribution is not , however , required and can be done with more discretion based on employer business results .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
In Canada , how you get money from a retirement plan depends on what type of plan . If it is a Registered Retirement Plan -LRB- RRSP -RRB- then getting money out is as simple as deregistering and surrendering the plan . You will have to pay tax as the amount will be added to your income . There will be a withholding tax , currently 10 % for up to $ 5,000 , 20 % for $ 5,001 to $ 15,000 and 30 % for over $ 15,000 . If it is a pension plan you can not get money from the plan other than as an income while you are with the company . Depending on circumstances , money from a pension plan is either transferred into a `` regular RRSP '' and can be withdrawn or a `` locked in RRSP '' and usually can not other than as an income . Check with your advisor before you do anything to make sure you are making an informed decision . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Is Whole Life Insurance A Bad Investment ?
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
Lets begin by defining what is an investment ? In the broadest sense of the word , an investment is when you place money or time into something in expectation of a return on that investment . To that end whole life insurance can serve the purpose of being an investment in that money is invested into it for an expected end . There are a lot of factors that can make an investment bad such as it loses money , it has a low rate of return or it offers no return at all . What makes an investment good or bad is to know what you expect it to return to you . If you want an insurance policy that offers a guaranteed death benefit and has cash value , then a whole life policy may work for you . Define what you want first and then find the vehicle that takes you where you want to go .
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
Why is whole life insurance bad ? Because I have something else to sell you or I have n't actually reviewed whole life because I am too lazy to learn about it as a product . Or my favorite , since the IRS created the MEC provision back in the 80 's which created a situation that if you put too much money into a policy , the tax advantages changed . Up until then , your local neighborhood stock broker would sell you life insurance as an investment as it 's qualities were very attractive to investors . Besides common sense tells me that insurance companies price their products based on the risk they bear providing insurance in every and I mean EVERY product they sell . Why would whole life be different ? Why would it be the `` only '' product witha higher price that is `` bad '' for the insured ?
Why invest in whole life insurance ? Well it is one of the few insurance products that you actually control , not the insurance carrier . That is a big reason why whole life insurance is expensive compared to other life products . The insurance company bears the risk of the contract as they can not alter or change the terms of the contract , they can not raise the price of the policy in later years and must receive the policy owners permission to do anything to the policy . What a whole life offers is a decent return for the safety it provides the policy holder . There is very little investment risk to a whole life policy compared to other places where a person can put money . This also is reflected in the return . If you had money invested in 2008 you learned first hand about investment risk . That said , while the rest of my investments were losing 40 % my whole life gained value . You ca n't go backwards with a whole life which makes it a good part of anybody 's planning . I call whole life the most boring investment a person can make . Why ? it does what it says it will do .
Whole Life Insurance is GOOD ! It 's not bad ! In fact it 's NEVER bad ! I like what Larry said above here ... `` Whole Life is bad because I want to sell you something else '' ... which in fact is an illegal practice called `` twisting '' . So if that 's the case and the reason you asked this question you should tell the person that told you whole life is bad that you 're thinking of reporting them to the Insurance Commissioner ! Even when people have money enough to provide their families with a comfortable lifestyle for generations they still buy whole life insurance . There are many reasons why , including the guaranteed , tax-free growth of wealth .
Lets begin by defining what is an investment ? In the broadest sense of the word , an investment is when you place money or time into something in expectation of a return on that investment . To that end whole life insurance can serve the purpose of being an investment in that money is invested into it for an expected end . There are a lot of factors that can make an investment bad such as it loses money , it has a low rate of return or it offers no return at all . What makes an investment good or bad is to know what you expect it to return to you . If you want an insurance policy that offers a guaranteed death benefit and has cash value , then a whole life policy may work for you . Define what you want first and then find the vehicle that takes you where you want to go .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Is Whole life insurance worth buying ? Well the answer is going to vary by the individual as people see worth differently . To me a decades old owner of whole life , all I can do is tell you why I purchased whole life . I liked the idea of owning the policy with a set price that can not be changed . I liked the terms of ownership did n't or could n't be changed over time . I like the steady boring returns to cash values that these policies produced . While my real estate , stock market and other investments have gone up and down , in many cases very dramatically , my boring whole life has done what it said it would . My whole life has NEVER gone backwards in value , it grows in good markets and bad ones . Is whole life the only thing you should purchase , well no . A good portfolio is a diverse portfolio . Whole life should be a part of it , but not all of it . Owning a whole life allows you to take risks elsewhere as you have a safety net .
Is Northwestern Mutual whole Life a good investment ? Well it depends on your needs . Your needs are what make any choice a good or bad investment . First Northwestern Mutual is a very highly rated fiscally strong company , as many others are . Using Whole life as an investment does work as part of an overall investment strategy as it provides a safe place to accumulate money as well as protecting your other plans . What you will find is whole life insurance is the most boring investment product out there . It 's not exciting , it 's not racy , it 's not an up and down product . It is a slow safe and secure place to put money out there . It 's boring because it does what it says it will do . I have owned whole life for almost 30 years and it has never let me down . Ca n't say the same about my real estate or stock market investments during that same window of time . Oh , last thing to keep it short . Whole life cash values do n't go backwards . You ca n't lose it once it 's there .
That is an excellent question ! As with most things , you have to look at them carefully , and see how they are best meant to be used . In most cases , the people that will talk the worst about that thing will have either misunderstood it , or not used it correctly . Because it did n't do as they expected , they talk bad about it , and give it a bad reputation . Annuities are a complex investment vehicle , and are not the best investment for everyone . Many people have learned this the wrong way , either because they did not understand what they were purchasing , or because it was not clearly explained to them . Some folks will disparage another form of investment if what they are trying to sell you pays them a salary , or a commission . It 's along the lines of the question '' Ever wonder why your stock broker/mutual fund manager drives a better car than you do , if he 's working with your money '' ? Annuities can be excellent retirement vehicles if they are the right vehicle for you . They can be very safe , and can provide a secure source of income . So if there is a bad reputation to them , it derives from being misinformed , or misused , and not because of the product itself . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Whole Life Insurance is not bad . It depends on who you are talking to and why they are saying that . WHole life provides a service . It gives a client a steady , non chaning premium each month ; it can last till age 100 ; it builds cash flow . It is what is called permanent coverae . Unlike term insurance , it doesnt change as you get older . Whole life is also very useful in providing key man insurance -LRB- insurance a company buys on top performers -RRB- and for those who may want to pay on their policies for a few years and then end up with a paid up policy . There can be many benefits to owning a whole life policy . Sadly there have been those in the marketplace selling and pushing only term insurance . Statistically people do better saving money as they pay their premiums on their insurance instead of `` investing the difference '' The onlyway to see which policy works in your bet interest is to meet with an agent who is not trying to sell you insurance ; rather meet with an agent who is working to provide you with the best insurance option for your particular situation and life goals ; you will be very happy you did !
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The death benefit of a life insurance policy passes to the beneficiary tax free . However , in the case of a cash value policy there may be tax due on the money that has grown more than the premium paid . Of course , in most life contracts the beneficiaries do not get the cash values upon death of the insured as they go back to the company upon death . This makes whole life insurance a very bad investment and guarantees the insured to be underinsured . Life insurance should always be separated from money invested by purchasing level term life insurance and investing the difference . If you have a whole life policy and change to a cheaper term policy the cash values does n't have to be lost as they can be transferred into a growth vehicle such as an annuity where it will grow tax-free and probate-free .
One type of life insurance -LRB- variable life insurance -RRB- has an investment component but no life insurance itself is NEVER an investment . Life insurance is guaranteed protection . An investment is risk . Without risk the product can NOT be considered an investment . This is not a bad thing . It 's a good thing . Life insurance does what it was designed to do better than any investment ever could . You will find a few agents that will call life insurance an investment to make a sale . Those who get caught at it are subject to huge fines and can lose their license to sell insurance . It is considered very misleading and the Department of Insurance of your state should be contacted if you ever have an agent telling you such a thing .
The purpose of whole life insurance is to provide guarantees . You know what ? It does a very good job at this . Guarantees are a godsend in a financial world in which cycles and ups and downs and cost increases are the norm . Its nice to have a product you can truly count on . These guarantees come in three delicious flavors : Flavor number one : a guaranteed premium . As you get older , your price stays the same . As it costs more for the company to insure you , your price stays the same . If the company has a bad investment year , or two , or three , your price stays the same . Thats good . But theres more . Flavor number two : a guaranteed death benefit . You see all those variables mentioned in number one above that could affect your price but dont ? They could also affect your death benefit . But they dont . Neither your age , nor their increasing cost , nor their poor investment performance can reduce the benefit you were leaving to your heirs . That is really good . But we have one last delicious flavor : Flavor number three : a guaranteed cash accumulation . Do yourself a favor and compare the guaranteed growth of cash inside a good whole life contract with other so-called guaranteed investments out there . You will notice that whole life basically beats the pants off the competition in this regard . Of course , you always have to be wise about taking money out of life insurance , and make sure you dont reduce your death benefit to an undesirable amount . But given that , whole life can make a real valuable contribution to the conservative portion of your financial portfolio .
Permanent Life Insurance is not bad . There are some who look at life insurance as an investment and compared to investments permanent insurance will not have the gains an investment may have . Permanent Life Insurance has been used to help protect large estate , provide final expenses , and insure business continuation . Life Insurance is not an investment it was never meant to be an investment . Permanent life insurance is designed for long term need and provides a safe secure way to provide protection when it is needed most .
When is not necessarily the best question to ask as to why to buy whole life insurance . If you know why you are purchasing insurance , that will help to determine your when . Most whole life policies pay out very little in dividends so I would look at other vehicles if you want dividends . Also , life insurance isa tax free vehicle when it pays out so consider that when you are looking at life insurance . To get to the root of the answer , most people purchase Whole Life policies as final expense policies because there is n't much of a reason to purchase Whole Life policies otherwise . The interest rate is dismal , dividends are not worth mentioning . The cost of a whole life policy can be affordable as to building up the savings or investment vehicle versus on your own . So , I would not purchase a whole life policy prior to age 50 .
Whole Life insurance is not an investment , it is a way to provide an immediate estate and a systematic way to save money in a very tax favorable way . Whole life provides a sound foundation for a good investment portfolio . The amount of the Whole Life would depend on your personal goals and financial situation . While buy term and invest the difference is a great idea , the reality is that most people who buy term never follow through on investing the difference . Life happens , emergencies come up and the money that was to be invested gets used for other things . This is fact based on statistics . If you want to invest , invest . If you want insurance that will be there when you will need it most , buy Whole Life insurance . Never put all your eggs in one basket . A base of Whole Life with added term insurance for your life insurance needs and sound investments to top off the portfolio is a safe sound way to accumulate cash for retirement and providing for final expense and a legacy for your family
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A Nursing Home Take A Life Insurance Policy ?
If you have Term life insurance , there is no cash value in it to count as an asset in a Medicaid spend down . If you have Whole or Universal life insurance with a large amount of cash value , it may or may not exceed cash value limits of policies that you can keep while entering a nursing home with Medicaid funds . Your social worker will tell you . If your policy does have high cash value , there is a law that allows you to retain some of the death benefit and use your cash to pay for your nursing home care . Or , you can transfer ownership of your policy to someone else , if it will be at least 5 years before you need to use long term care , and if you do not have the resources to pay for it in other ways . The nursing home will not take your life insurance policy . It will be evaluated along with all your assets , if Medicaid is needed .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare pays for the first 20 days of a * qualified stay in the nursing home , and then it will pay all but $ 152/day to day 100 . After day 100 , the only nursing home care that is paid is what would have been paid if the recipient is not in the nursing home . I.e. Drugs and durable medical equipment , doctor visits , hospital stays , and other qualified products and services . * To be a qualified stay , the patient must have been in the hospital for at least three days for the same condition for which they are going to the nursing home . The health condition must be medically determined to need skilled nursing care from a Medicare approved facility . Without these qualifiers , Medicare will not pay any part of the nursing home care , except that which they would have received if they not in a nursing home .
If you have term life insurance it has no cash value . That would make the answer very simple . No one can take that from you . So your life insurance would remain secure while in a nursing home , if it is term insurance , so long as you can find a way to continue to pay the premiums . The more interesting question is what if you have permanent or cash value life insurance ? These policies build up value , and can actually be sold , or surrendered for cash . A nursing home might want that money . Depending on the nursing home and their contract with you , they might require you to pay them from such proceeds , but there is no legal requirement that you do so for them , and you can , of course , go to a different nursing home . The harder question is what if you have no or little other assets , and are planning to enter a government assisted facility ? Medicare will NOT pay for long term care , but MediCal will , but you will need to spend down your assets . So the question arises , if you are required to spend down your assets , will you have to sell the life insurance policy -LRB- meaning surrender its cash value -RRB- in order to stay in a MediCal nursing home . The answer to that very narrow specific question can change from time to time , as the MediCal rules change . But know that if you wish to claim impoverishment , and you retain ownership of a substantial cash value asset , you should expect the government to demand that you sell it and use the proceeds to pay for your care . Tread carefully . Thank you . GARY LANE .
You would need Long Term Care Insurance if you were no longer able to care for yourself and wanted to receive your care in your home or other location besides a nursing home . Medicare will pay for home health care or nursing home care if there is a need for skilled nursing services . If you need assistance with dressing and showering but do n't need IV 's , physical therapy , speech therapy , or other skilled nursing care , Medicare will not pay for in home services , adult day care , assisted living , or nursing home . Long Term Care insurance will pay for all those options if you are unable to perform 2 or 3 activities of daily living .
Medicare can provide some limited skilled nursing home care benefits . For days 1-20 , you pay $ 0 each benefit period . For days 21-100 , you pay $ 152 per day each benefit period . Days 101 + , you 're responsible for all costs . So , in short , Medicare will provide coverage for nursing care for up to 100 days . Medicaid can help pay nursing home expenses for Medicare beneficiaries . Medicare.gov provides a list of each specific covered service and eligibility conditions that need to be met for Medicare to cover nursing home care expenses . Long term care insurance is going to provide the greatest nursing home benefits .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Medicaid qualified annuities , or `` Medicaid friendly annuities '' , are annuities that can sometimes be used by couples when one person in the couple enters a nursing home . One spouse is able to keep half their assets and the home he/she lives in , the other spouse must spend down the other half on nursing home care before becoming eligible for Medicaid . Rather than spend down those funds , the spouse entering the nursing home transfers the money to the other spouse , who puts it in an irrevocable , immediate annuity that is set to pay the at-home spouse an income up to the number of years left in his/her life expectancy . Consult a knowledgeable elder law attorney in your state to see if this is allowed in your state , and to know all the pro 's and con 's before endeavoring to take out a Medicaid qualified annuity .
Medicare can provide some limited skilled nursing home care benefits under Part A . During the first 20 days of a benefit period , you pay $ 0 . From days 21-100 , you pay $ 152 per day . Days 101 + , you 're responsible for all costs . Medicare.gov provides a list of each specific covered service and eligibility conditions that need to be met for Medicare to cover nursing home care expenses . Medicaid can help pay nursing home expenses for Medicare beneficiaries . Long term care insurance is going to provide the greatest nursing home benefits . These policies are designed for long-term stays -LRB- e.g. 3 , 4 , or 5 years -RRB- .
If the hospital stay that preceded your admittance into the nursing home was at least a three day stay , was for the condition that requires skilled care , and a few other stipulations , you will be admitted to a Medicare bed in the nursing home . For 20 days , all nursing home expenses are paid by Medicare . After 20 days , there is a copay until the maximum length of 100 days , at which time Medicare no longer contributes to nursing home expenses .
Long Term Care Insurance is recommended for those having considerable assets . If you needed to go to a nursing home or assisted living facility , or receive home health care to assist you with your activities of daily living -LRB- dressing , eating , bathing , etc -RRB- , those institutions can go after your savings and investments while you are alive -LRB- if your spouse is alive , he/she can keep half -RRB- , and even take the proceeds from your home after you and your spouse die . If you have very little in the way of assets , long term care insurance is an unnecessary expense . But if you have assets you would like to protect , and can afford the premium , having long term care insurance is an excellent tool in planning your future , preserving your peace of mind , and paying the bills if needed . And a word about life insurance policies with living benefits . I am all in favor of them , but you do need to consider how much is `` enough '' when purchasing life insurance that you may want to use if you can no longer care for yourself . Nursing home costs average nearly $ 80,000 per year , nationally , for a semi-private room . Someone wanting to hire a round the clock caregiver in their home can expect to pay over $ 175,000 per year -LRB- $ 20 per hour -RRB- . It can be expensive to buy a permanent life insurance policy with face amounts large enough to cover even a couple years of care . Just be sure you understand how much of the life insurance face amount is available to you , what triggers it takes to get it , and when you can get it . Then compare it to the price of buying long term care insurance providing comparable benefits .
Nursing home care is covered by Medicare in some circumstances . 1 . You must stay in a Medicare certified skilled nursing facility . 2 . You must enter the nursing home after a qualified inpatient hospital stay of at least three consecutive days -LRB- starting with the day you enter the hospital , not counting the day you leave -RRB- . 3 . You must enter the SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- within 30 days . 4 . Your doctor must have ordered the SNF stay due to your need for more than custodial care on a daily basis , and the SNF care must be for something treated during the qualifying hospital stay . 5 . Medicare Part A pays for up to 100 days of nursing home coverage .
Nursing homes can not take your whole life insurance policy away from you , per se . But if you are in the spend down period of going on Medicaid to pay nursing home costs , they will put a limit on how much cash value your Whole Life insurance can have . That amount is around $ 1,500 . If your policy exceeds that amount , you have some choices : 1 -RRB- There is a law allowing people to keep some of their coverage , while using the rest for long term care expenses . 2 -RRB- You may be able to assign your policy to a funeral home . 3 -RRB- If you are looking down the road , you could change ownership of your policy to someone else . But this needs to be done 5 years in advance of going to the nursing home . 4 -RRB- In some situations , you can put your policy into an annuity . Please give me a call if you 'd like me to help you set up a final expense policy that will be protected if you enter an extended care facility , or to help you figure out what to do with coverage you already have .
Skilled Nursing Care is covered under Medicare Part A and can only follow at least a three day stay in a hospital . Skilled Nursing Care is rehab , the goal at a Skilled Nursing Facility is to get you better so you can come home . Medicare covers Skilled Nursing Care at 100 % for the first 20 days . If your doctor thinks you should stay longer than 20 days Medicare starts charging a co-pay of $ 157.50 per day for days 21-100 . Skilled Nursing Care should not be confused with Long Term Care because Medicare will only allow you to stay up to 100 days in a Skilled Nursing Facility . Be sure your Medicare Supplement policy covers the additional days -LRB- 21-100 -RRB- in a Skilled Nursing Facility .
Medicare can pay for nursing home stays under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- The nursing home stay must be within 30 days of a qualified hospital stay in the hospital of at least days . 2 -RRB- There must be a prescribed medical need for daily skilled nursing or rehabilitative care . 3 -RRB- The facility must be Medicare approved . 4 -RRB- Medicare will only continue as long as the patient is showing improvement . 5 -RRB- The first 20 days are totally covered . Days 21-100 charge a co-payment that was $ 144.50 per day in 2012 . After 100 days , Medicare no longer pays any benefits for nursing home care .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . In general , Part A is going to cover : 1 -RRB- Hospital care 2 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care 3 -RRB- Hospice care 4 -RRB- Home health services 5 -RRB- Nursing home care Please note , nursing home care and skilled nursing care benefits are generally limited and certain conditions need to be met to provide coverage . If you want to have protection in the event you need long-term care , then you should secure a long-term care insurance policy -LRB- especially while you 're healthy so you can medically qualify for the coverage - it is not guaranteed issue -RRB- . You can visit the Medicare.gov website for specific information regarding exact coverage figures or send me a private message if you have any questions .
Yes . The type of insurance that pays for nursing homes is called Long Term Care Insurance or LTC . These policies will cover nursing home stays and also will pay for assisted living facilities are even pay for assistance at your home to keep you out of a nursing home . There are many different types of LTC policies so make certain your agent gives you many choices and explains your options .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Universal Life Insurance Works ?
When you pay a premium to a universal life policy , that amount which exceeds the current cost of insurance is credited to the cash value of the policy . That cash value earns tax deferred interest according to the provisions of the policy . In addition to the current cost of insurance there are fees which are also withdrawn from the policy as stated in the policy . The insurance company generally offers a minimum interest rate set by the contract , but may change the rate credited from time to time .
Universal Life is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life - this is the official name of this type of product . It describes in a simple way how the product works . Premiums are flexible because that can be adjusted upward or downward . You can also skip premiums . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policyowners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The same companies that carry Term Life Insurance often carry Universal Life Insurance , and most agencies that sell Term also sell UL . When purchasing online , you will want to work with a licensed agent who has some experience , so they will understand the in 's and out 's of Universal Life . There are several types of Universal Life Insurance . Guaranteed UL allows you to lock in a level premium that will guarantee the policy to pay the death benefit to a certain age . This guarantee might be 20 years from now ; it might be to age 121 , or something different . It is important to select a guarantee to avoid the problems Universal Life presented in the past , when people bought while interest rates were high , and their policies started lapsing much earlier than anticipated when interest rates dropped . There are also many Universal Life policies that do not have `` no lapse '' guarantees . How long your coverage last relies on what the interest rate and cost of insurance are at any given time . Variable Universal Life allows you to invest in the stock market , with the potential for more growth -LRB- and more loss -RRB- than other UL policies . Indexed Universal Life allows you to take advantage of some modest gains by allocating premium to equity index accounts . While it does not have as much cash growth potential as VUL , it has much more protection from losses . Added to these are Survivor Universal Life policies off all types . These cover two people , and pay when the second person dies . Again , you 'll want to use an experienced agent when you buy UL . There are many knowledgeable agents on this website who can help you .
There are five types of permanent life insurance policies : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Participating whole life and guaranteed universal life are used for indemnification planning . Participating whole life , with a max term rider and paid up additions rider can be used for income as can current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . The income design must conform to TAMRA and minimize the death benefit amount to optimize the crediting methodology .
There are two types of life insurance : Term and Permanent life insurance . Term life insurance is for a time certain period of coverage to indemnify your beneficiaries from financial liability . Permanent life insurance is for ongoing financial liabilities that may never terminate . Depending upon your age term life insurance issues at guaranteed periods of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life insurances can mature up to age 121 and some polices actually isle the life of the insured . Permanent life insurance can be classified into two categories : Par whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life has four policy platforms : Guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
While both universal life and whole life insurance are permanent products and have a death benefit the similarities end there . Whole life insurance has a guarantee premium for the life of the contract and generally is credited by a dividend or return of unused premium . Universal life gas four policy types : current assumption universal life , guaranteed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . With the exception of guaranteed universal life , the others have flexible premiums or death benefit that can be changed by the policy owner .
It depends on the insurer as to what Adjustable Life is . There were a couple of midwestern companies who had products with that moniker which were fixed premium adjustable life insurance products . Universal Life one of the dominant forms of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life which is the official name of the product . So , it may be that you are asking about Universal Life . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
Life Insurance is a mortality product constructed to cover temporary -LRB- term insurance -RRB- or permanent -LRB- permanent insurance -RRB- financial liabilities . Is your financial liability temporary or perpetual ? Term life insurance is generally offered in increments of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life polices can cover you to age 121 and has five policy types : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . There are three major planning categories for life insurance : indemnification , income and inheritance . First , determine which planning category you need . If the planning category is indemnification and/or inheritance then determine is the need temporary or permanent ? The solution is either term or guaranteed universal life insurance . If the planning category is income , life insurance can be a supplemental retirement alternative . Here 's some product alternatives : current assumption universal life insurance with three crediting methods : interest rates , indices and separate sub account performance using the lowest TAMRA compliant death benefit option . For income , you may also want to look at TAMRA compliant lowest death benefit , participating whole life , with a max term rider and a paid up additions rider .
The only type of life insurance that you can borrow from is Universal Life or Whole Life . You can not borrow from Term Life . There are many types of Universal Life and Whole Life , and especially with Universal Life , some policies will have very little cash value . If you are purchasing a Universal Life policy for the purpose of borrowing from it , you will do best with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life .
There are two financially oriented universes : an insurance planning universe , and a financial planning universe . In the former , it never makes sense to buy term and those that live in that universe will give you an infinite number of reasons why - in the long run - it is a waste of your money . If you buy term , you will be called a `` termite '' . In the latter , term insurance - or permanent insurance - are viewed asfinancial vehicles that can be used to achieve a certain objective or several objectives at once , through leveraging : paying `` small '' dollars now for `` large '' dollars later . It 's called `` using the right tool for the job '' . Neither universe is right or wrong , although I would imagine you know which universe I come from . The point is to stay fixed on how much death benefit -LRB- coverage or face amount -RRB- you need and for how long . The way I see it , one needs term when they have a high need and a low budget , and a type of permanent insurance policy for when they eventually die . In other words , you need both . I recommend buying term in the higher amount that you need early in life -LRB- wife , kids , education , mortgage , etc. -RRB- for the period of time you are most likely to need it -LRB- 20-30 years -RRB- , but at the same time , buy a small face amount of permanent insurance to cover final expenses , projecting forward a nice , long lifetime and what it will probably cost to put you in a box , or reduce your mass through pyric methodolgies and put you in an urn . Allow for other final expenses , such as possible debt , medical expenses not covered by insurance , and a little `` transitional money '' for those you leave behind . That way , when your term runs out , you 'll have only the permanent plan to pay premium on , and , if you design it prudently , you might find that your final expense policy no longer needs any premium when your term runs out . You 'll need an experienced and knowledgeable agent from the appropriate universe to put this together for you so that it fits your budget . Final note : As has been appropriately mentioned in an answer above , be sure to purchase only `` fully convertible term '' for the reasons cited therein .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
If you buy universal life insurance that offers a lifetime guaranteed level premium and level death benefit , there are few cons to universal life insurance . With those guarantees , it is a permanent policy , so it will usually have a higher premium than term . But it often has a lower premium than whole life . Also , guaranteed no lapse universal life policies do not usually have a lot of cash value , but for many people , that is a worthy trade off for the lower premium . If you get a universal life policy without guarantees , you need to be careful that your policy does not lapse before you want it to . If you purchase indexed universal life or variable universal life , you also need to manage the investments made within your policy . The con would be that many people assume their agent is managing their policy for them , and are dismayed when coverage ends or they have very little cash value to show for their years of premiums . If you understand your policy well and know how to manage it , being able to manage your own policy can be a pro rather than a con .
Universal Life insurance works well for people who want lifelong coverage at the lowest possible price . GUL -LRB- Guaranteed Universal Life -RRB- can be guaranteed not to lapse to age 120 + at a level premium . Because GUL has very low cash value , the premium can be kept relatively low for permanent coverage . Indexed Universal Life is a good product for those who want a safe way to save up money for retirement income . Unlike GUL , IUL is used to create large amounts of cash value that can be borrowed tax deferred during retirement . So Universal Life really can work for almost anyone . It is flexible and can be adapted for a lifetime .
Universal Life insurance is a combination of term life insurance and a tax-deferred savings plan paying a variable return . There is a guaranteed interest rate and cost of insurance set which stipulates how long the policy is guaranteed to last . This can be as long as age 121 with some UL products , so that the policy is then considered permanent insurance . Some Universal Life products , especially Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life , are designed to generate cash value . They may or may not have a guaranteed lifetime no lapse feature . Universal Life is an adjustable and flexible policy that can often be tweaked to meet the needs of the insured over a lifetime .
Flexible premium adjustable life is the more antiquated title of universal life . Today , there are four different universal life polices. : current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . These three is feature the flexibility or adjust-ability of premiums and death benefit amounts . Guaranteed universal life , in general terms , does not have this flexible feature based on it 's secondary guarantees .
A very simple way to picture how a Universal Life policy works is with a river with a dam on it . If the dam is open and water -LRB- your insurance premium -RRB- is flowing into the river , the river gets longer . I.e. . The years your Universal Life lasts get longer , maybe even the rest of your life . At the same time , there is very little water in the lake , or cash value in the policy . If the dam is closed , the lake gets higher , or the cash value in your policy grows . However , the river will dry up . If you want your Universal Life to build up cash value AND have longevity , you need to add more water -LRB- premium -RRB- to it . The beauty of a dam is that it can be adjusted to harness the power of water . The same is true of Universal Life insurance . It is very adjustable and can help accomplish your financial goals .
Universal Life is a form of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life . This is the official name of this type of product . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Homeowners Insurance Cheaper For New Homes ?
It may be . Normally newer construction is more accurately priced for reconstruction valuation when you are seeking a quote for coverage . Newer homes are typically less prone to some incidents that occur in older homes because of the age and deterioration of material or lack of maintenance to the premise . Every carrier sets there own rates for the geographic locations that they have a presence in and in some cases may weigh the risk of new construction and some older construction the same . Contact a local agent to discuss coverage availability and pricing within your area .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
We will begin to answer this question with the following caution : when one asks about a policy being ` cheaper ' than another -LRB- especially when it is the first question asked -RRB- , the immediate concern arises regarding the lack of importance of the coverage which is the primary reason for purchasing the insurance . To answer the question correctly , Homeowners Insuranceand Landlords Insuranceare not related in any way other than to provide property coverage on a similar dwelling . TheHomeowners Insurance policy is defined and writtenfor the Owner Occupied home of the titled owner of the property ; the Landlords Insurance policy is defined and written for the Tenant Occupedhome of the titled owner of the property . Each policy contract contains an Occupancy Clause stating the occupancy of thedwelling insured . We have witnessed large losses which have been denied by carriers due to the occupancy not matching the policy purpose . Therefore , if you have a tenant occupied home , you will need to purchase a Landlords Policy and if you are seeking to insure your primary home , you should purchase a Homeowners Policy . The LandlordsPolicy statistically poses a greater risk factor to the insurance company ; however generally , the LandlordsPolicy does not provide coverage for personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- and provides a more limited form of Liability Coverage listed as Premises OnlyLiability . Now , regarding cost , the premium is specific to the carrier 's experience with each type of policy.There are insurance carriers that have a much worse historic experience on tenant occupied properties ; thus , the Landlords Policy would be rated as a higher risk than the Homeowners Policy . However , in most cases , for the same Dwelling Coverage amount , we find that the Landlords Policy Premium islower than the Homeowners Policy . Awise word to the public would be to purchase the correct coverage for the application since if a futureclaim is denied based on the incorrect policy form being purchased , the whole purpose of the insurance is void and unnecessary . For more information regaring Homeowners Insurance , please click the following link : WEBSITELINK
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
That is a great question ! There are a couple of quick things that might help . First , look at what policies you might be able to bundle with your homeowners , to get discounts offered by the insurer . For example , your auto insurances may be cheaper if purchased through the same company that insures your home . Many companies will give substantial discounts to have all of your business under their roof . The second thing is to look at raising your deductible . Generally a higher out of pocket on your end means a lower premium . Be careful not to set a deductible that is too high for you to cover though , should you ever need to . Lastly , revalue the contents of your home , and see if you can reduce the coverage that you 'd applied for . Many electronic appliances in particular are much cheaper to replace today than they would have cost ten years ago . Speak to your agent , and have them help you find the best option for you . Thank you for asking !
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Renters insurance is definitely cheaper than homeowners insurance . The reason is that renters insurance covers almost everything covered by your homeowners policy except coverage A or the dwelling . The dwelling is covered by the Landlord and the content , liability , medical payment and loss or uses is covered by the tenant . A homeowners policy will cover all these plus the structure and that is why it cost most .
That is a great question ! There is a reason why cheaper things are cheaper . In the case of life insurance , term policies are much cheaper than whole life policies are . The reason ? Term policies have zero frills . They rarely have to pay out , as the terms usually expire before you do ; and they have nothing extra in the payment but insurance costs , so there is no accumulating cash value either . Term policies can be a good option in some cases , please be sure that you speak with an agent to make sure that it is right for your needs . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! If you increased your mortgage , and there is a chance of leaving that debt behind , then it might be a really good idea to add a policy or increase your coverage to hedge against that risk . Knowing that your new mortgage is probably putting a dent into your available funds , I 'd suggest that you look into a term life insurance policy in an amount that would cover the amount of the new mortgage cost . Term policies will be much cheaper than a whole life policy would be , and there is really no reason for the extra expense of the insurance once the mortgage is paid off . A term policy lasts for a specified period of time , and then ends , which makes it perfect for this kind of need . Look for a straight term , or decreasing term policy to cover the mortgage debt . I 'd advise you to find a good independent agent in your area , maybe your homeowners or auto insurance people are a good place to start , if it will earn you discounts on those policies also . Any reputable life insurance agent can hook you up also . If you have any questions on term policies , please feel free to contact me , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! There are some really important decisions for you to make when it comes to your insurance policies now . Here are some things to consider : 1 . -RRB- Do n't forget to change the beneficiaries on your life insurance policies to reflect your new spouse . If something were to happen to you , would n't you want them to get the money ? 2 . -RRB- Look at your auto insurance policies - shop both companies and see who will offer the cheaper rate for you , if your spouse were to be added to your respective policy . Consider the advantages of consolidating your renters/homeowners policy there also , to gain bigger discounts . 3 . -RRB- Your marraige qualifies as a life event that allows you to switch your health insurance coverage . Whose policy is cheaper to add the other to ? Check into that also . You can save a bundle , with just a few phone calls . I hope you find that true for you . Congratulations , and may God bless and keep your marriage ! Thanks for asking !
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
Renters insurance is commonly called a tenant policy . Yes , tenant policies are cheaper than homeowners . Although the policies are similar , the homeowners policy protects the building itself , the renters does not -LRB- that is the landlords concern . -RRB- Both policies have a section that is largely overlooked and that is liability coverage . Whether you own or rent , a lawsuit can ruin your day .
A renters policy is cheaper for the same amount of coverage on personal property . A homeowners covers not only the personal property but the residence itself . That is why it is more expensive . For your information a Condo policy is a combination of a homeowners and tenants because they are not responsible for the grounds and outer walls of the building .
the good news : Ohio is the cheapest state in the country for auto insurance . the bad news : auto insurance for teenagers is very still expensive no matter which state you 're in . but here are a couple tips for getting lower rates : - stay on your parents ' policy . unless there are special circumstances , it almost always comes out cheaper to stay on your parents ' policy than having your own policy . - shop around . companies have different appetites . the more companies that you get quotes from , the better your chances at finding lower rates .
Sure , but why would you ? My reason for saying this is two fold . First , in order to have your phone covered under your home insurance you would have to include it under your scheduled property section . This requires that specifically name the phone on your home owners policy . This is a disadvantage because if your phone is damaged through a named peril you have to make a claim against your home owners policy for personal property away from the premise . If you have an aggregate limit for your scheduled property it will eat away at it . Also , it has to be a named peril , it ca n't be a reason like you lost your phone . The moredevastatingpoint is that you will more than likely have to pay your deductible , which for a home is usually $ 1,000 . You can always lower your deductible , but then you will be paying more in premium each year . The second reason is there is cheaper insurance you can purchase for your phone either through your service provider -LRB- i.e. att , sprint , verizon -RRB- or online .
Everyone wants to pay less for car insurance butbe careful purchasingthe cheapest policy . Purchasing the cheapest policy onlinemay cost you severly down the road . For example , a home owner in Virginia recentlypurchased a policy online with state minmium limits . The policy was $ 15 less per month so he decided to switch . Two months later he was hit by an uninsured driver and in the hospital for 3 months . The new policy he purchased did not cover his car much less his medical bills . Cheaper is notbetter sowhen it comes to insurance focus on finding the best value .
Great question ! Many years ago I purchased a policy at a dealership in Maryland so that I could drive the car I 'd just bought home . Some dealerships will have an agent that works there , -LRB- usually in the financing department -RRB- but often it is cheaper for you to call your agent , and have the new car added to your policy and emailed or faxed to the dealership while you wait . It can save you a few bucks , and a lot over the long run - like a gas station near the rental car return , they know if you need it , they can charge more , you will spend it . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Who Has Good Renters Insurance ?
Many good agents use many good companies to write renters insurance . The very best policy is the one that is in force and pays the expected amount when you have a loss . Regardless of the company name , the price or what kind of animal they advertise with on Television that is the best one , the one you own so find an agent and get covered !!
That is a great question ! There are a whole lot of companies out there that have good renters policies available . Depending upon what your definition of best is , cheapest , best coverage for the buck , easiest to qualify for , etc. , it 's pretty hard to name one in particular for you . I 'd recommend that you ask your complex managers , they can give you a good start based on who they 've had good experiences , or look for an independent agent that can help you find the right policy for you . Thanks for asking !
When it comes to renters insurance most companies are pretty equal as it relates to coverages . You can shop with an independent agent for various pricing . I would suggest you work with the company who has your auto insurance or look to shop a package as this will get you the maximum discounts .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
A good life insurance company for you is the one that will give you the best rates . I mean , the bottom line is that you do not want to overpay for coverage , right ? Underwriting drives the purchase of life insurance . Which company will underwrite you most aggressively ? It has to be a company that has a sophisticated understanding of the risk you represent , and a comfort level with being aggressive in applying their underwriting guidelines . Lets suppose you unfortunately have diabetes . Your broker would have to find you a company that is very competitive in underwriting diabetics . The same applies for people who have hepatitis , and a cancer history , and heart disease , and who climb mountains , and who scuba dive , etc. . Companies vary widely in their willingness and capability for taking on different risks at a good price . And this can change over time . The company that was good for people who are overweight last year , may not be the best one this year . Not only that : even a company who is usually good for your underwriting risk , may not be the right company for you at this time . Like every other business , life insurance companies can have ebbs and flows in their level of service . They may be short-staffed . They may be experiencing a huge backlog of cases . There may be a merger or an acquisition in the wind which will affect their underwriting decisions . Then again , there could be factors that would work in your favor . A company may want to close out the year with an influx of good business , and make you an exceptional offer . Sometimes they make just want to make a business decision and take your case because they like it . If your broker prequalifies you properly , all these factors will be addressed . Youll be confident that youve chosen a good company .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
Good renters insurance pays a claim to the greatest extent possible and makes you whole when you suffer a loss . This is true whether it is loss due to fire , or loss due to lawsuit . Good renters insurance also meets the requirements of your landlord . The place to buy good renters insurance is from a trusted insurance agent . This agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice , and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . Premium is a secondary consideration .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Yes , a landlord can require a tenant to purchase renters insurance . Landlords are responsible for insurance that covers the dwelling , but renters are responsible for their belongings.Renters can also be held liable for any injuries that happen in the dwelling , which would be covered by the renters insurance . Since renters insurance is so inexpensive , it 's always a good idea to have renters insurance , rather than risk losing everything .
A good life insurance agent has some important characteristics . A good agent is a good listener . A good agent will listen to you and will check with you to make sure that you are fully understood . A good agent communicates clearly to both you and to the insurance company . The agent should explain as completely as possible the details of the policy and patiently answer your questions . The good agent will communicate your information and concerns to the underwriting staff of the insurance company . Underwriters are usually quite conservative . The more that the agent can paint a picture that the underwriter can understand ; it is more likely that you will have a good outcome . Finally a good agent offers sound financial advice . A good agent isnt an order taker . A good agent will show you the advantages of alternate approaches to your problem . A good agent will not leave out anything vital to the case and will carefully counsel you as it regards your unique situation . Are there many good life insurance agents ? I think that there are , however , they are often in demand and do little to solicit business . You probably need to check with your colleagues and friends and locate that good life insurance agent that they trust .
end question
start question
annuities
How Are Annuity Gains Taxed ?
If you purchase a deferred annuity with pre-tax money , the entire balance , including the gains will be taxable . As long as the money stays inside the annuity , the taxation is deferred . A deferred annuity has an accumulation phase and a distribution phase . During accumulation , the annuity grows untaxed . When the annuity is paid out during the distribution phase , the payouts are taxed at ordinary income tax rates for you during that year . If you buy a deferred annuity with after tax dollars then a portion of the payouts will be a tax free return of your principal . It is considered `` last in , first out '' meaning that withdrawals are taxed until the interest and earnings portion is depleted . After that , your principal can be withdrawn without taxes .
How are annuity gains taxed ? Well , depending on how you funded the annuity and how you choose to distribute from the annuity the answer and be part of the distribution to all of the distribution . If you use qualified money to fund your annuity , you 've skipped paying taxes on those funds . This means when you have the funds distributed the entire amount is taxable . If you paid taxes on the money used to fund the annuity , you only pay taxes on the gains liquidated . The distribution is basically split in half for tax purposes . One thing as you consider distribution from your annuity . . only the money actually taken out is taxed , so taking funds out on a regular basis means you only pay taxes on what comes out of the policy .
Gain on an annuity is taxed as ordinary income . This is the situation with a non-qualified annuity . Gain is computed by the insurance company and is reported to both you and the IRS . If the annuity is held in a qualified plan , taxation will be in accordance with taxation for that plan .
That is a great question ! The answer depends upon how your annuity is structured , but the short answer is that a good portion of it is taxable . If your annuity is rolled into a retirement plan that was a pre-tax deduction , then whatever you draw from it is taxable . If it is one that you purchased for yourself and paid for post-tax , then the amount that the annuity earned in interest is taxable . Your annuity may pay out all the interest first , -LRB- which is taxed at whatever tax rate you are in at the time -RRB- until you hit the non-taxable amount you 'd invested into it , or it may pay a portion of both , and tax you upon the interest portion of that payout . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
How are annuity gains taxed ? Well , depending on how you funded the annuity and how you choose to distribute from the annuity the answer and be part of the distribution to all of the distribution . If you use qualified money to fund your annuity , you 've skipped paying taxes on those funds . This means when you have the funds distributed the entire amount is taxable . If you paid taxes on the money used to fund the annuity , you only pay taxes on the gains liquidated . The distribution is basically split in half for tax purposes . One thing as you consider distribution from your annuity . . only the money actually taken out is taxed , so taking funds out on a regular basis means you only pay taxes on what comes out of the policy .
Annuities are always taxable when gain is withdrawn from the annuity unless the annuity is placed inside a Roth account . Annuities do defer taxes when no money is removed from the annuity , so if no withdrawal , the gain is not realized until it is withdrawn from the annuity . Annuities use the Last in Last out -LRB- LIFO -RRB- accounting rule , which means gain in the annuity must be withdrawn before basis is removed , unless the annuity is annuitized . For annuities with a cost basis -LRB- i.e. non tax deducted/qualified -RRB- annuitization uses a tax rule known as the exclusion ratio to make part of the income stream gain and part non-taxable basis .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
Variable Annuities are taxed just the same as a traditional Fixed Annuity . If the Annuity is not in an IRA or other Qualified Plan , then any withdrawal is subject to capitol gains tax , both Federal and State . This is just on the `` Gains '' of the policy . If the Annuity is in an IRA or Qualified Retirement Plan , then withdrawals are taxed as Income . It is also important to note that any withdrawal before age 591/2 , is subject to a 10 % tax penalty . This is for IRA & non IRA Annuities . If the Annuity is a Variable Immediate Annuity , which pays an income stream to you , then things are a bit different . If it is an IRA then all income payments are taxed as Income . If it is not an IRA , then it is taxed under the exclusion ration . This `` excludes '' a certain percentage of the income from taxes , since it is considered basis -LRB- principle -RRB- .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
An annuity is a systematic method of accumulation and liquidation of money that you desire to set aside for a later retirement . In the accumulation phase you mostly make deposits into your account . In the liquidation phase , you can take money from the account to provide a steady monthly income for a period of years , and even for the balance of your life . Annuities pay interest like a savings account . Unlike a bank savings account , you do n't pay income tax on the interest gained until you begin liquidating your account with either a stream of payments of lump withdrawals . When interest you earn is not taxed today , it has a chance to compound and grow faster . The government will get to tax your gain at a later time , when you start taking out the money . Some annuities can be deducted from income on your 1040 tax statement and this also helps your retirement funds grow faster . These types of annuities are referred to as `` qualified annuities '' because the annuity meets the tax law qualifications that permit taking a reduction of income for the annuity deposit . While there are lots of rules , if you go back to the start and realize that an annuity is nothing more than a method of accumulating money for retirement , and also a method of distributing money from the account in retirement , you get most of what an annuity really is . Good luck .
That is an excellent question !! Many people become confused by this type of annuity because of it 's connection to the stock market . The annuity does have it 's performance linked to the performance of the market , but it does not involve any particular stock . Your annuity gains based upon the gains that the aggregate market gains , not ant particular stock . For example , your annuity bases its gains on the S&P 500 . If the S&P 500 rises from point a to point b , your annuity credits your fund with a promised gain . You have not purchased any stock , nor are you participating in the market . You are just `` gambling '' on its performance . Since there is no stock investment , it is not considered a security , unlike a variable annuity , which does invest in the market , and therefore is considered a security . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
In Canada , immediate and deferred annuities are , with one exception , taxed on an accrual basis . The growth or income is taxed as earned , not as received . How the income is taxed , depends , if it is interest income or , in the case of Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , interest , dividends or capital gains . Prescribed Annuities enjoy special taxation -LRB- Section 304 of Income Tax Act -RRB- . They are taxed on a straight line basis rather than on an accrual basis . If you qualify for a prescribed annuity then total amount of `` expected '' interest is averaged based on the number of payments . For example invest in a prescribed life income annuity and your `` life expectancy '' is 22 years . The amount of investment DIVIDED BY `` life expectancy '' EQUALS return of your principle and it is not taxed . The annuity payment SUBTRACT the return of your principle is taxable . The tax savings can be substantial , which is why prescribed annuities are often used to increase after tax income . Especially for those who prefer guaranteed interest income . A life insurance policy can replace the capital for your estate . Depending on the the individual circumstances , increases of after tax income can be 50 % or more . Implementing a strategy involving payout annuities is sometimes complicated , it is however , always permanent . Search for Retirement / Financial planner in your area . Then look for an experienced life insurance broker with a professional designation such as a CLU or CFP . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please contact me .
Non-qualified annuities that are annuitized for the life of the annuitant guarantee life time income based on the annuitants life no matter how long the annuitant lives . Part of the annuitized payment is return of basis -LRB- tax free -RRB- amortized to life expectancy with some of the gain as well . When the basis is exhausted then the payment is entirely gain and taxable as ordinary income . That can be a good idea . But product suitability is very important and one of the items of suitability is a establishing a risk tolerance assessment . Non-qualified deferred annuities have three basic crediting methods : fixed interest rate crediting in an annuity , indice crediting in index annuity and crediting or sometimes debiting in separate sub accounts in variable annuities . Was you determine which crediting method fits your risk tolerance , then you should decide how long your annuity position should be and does the policy have any benefits for maintaining it in force .
It depends what type of Annuity it is and if the Annuity is in a Qualified Retirement Account or not . If it is in a Qualified account , like an IRA/401k/SEP , then any distribution is 100 % taxable . If it is a non-qualified account , then only withdrawals of the gain are taxed -LRB- as income -RRB- . But since Annuities use LIFO , the gain will be the first part of the Annuity that is distributed . The growth of a non-qualified Fixed Annuity is tax deferred . If it is an Immediate Annuity/Lifetime Annuity , then again it depends on the tax status . For a Qualified account 100 % of the distributions/income will be taxable . For non-qualified , a portion of the payments will be tax-free and considered a `` return of basis/premium '' .
That is an excellent question ! The investment gains within your Roth IRA are not subject to capital gains taxes . As long as your gains are contained within the IRA , you are n't subject to any taxes on those gains . That is one of the best reasons to have one . Your contributions are taxed before making them , so like life insurance , it is n't taxable coming out . There are rules about making qualified withdrawals that have to be followed to keep your withdrawals tax free during the first five years , but they only apply to the gains , not the contributions . -LRB- Those can be taken out at any time without penalty , other than loss of earnings potential . -RRB- Roth 's are excellent investment vehicles , particularly when considering the tax implications . Thanks for asking !
You can generally withdraw money from an annuity at any time . However , you may be subject to a penalty and taxes . Annuities are generally meant to be long-term or at least a specified term such as 5 , 7 , 10 or more years . Each contact will have rules on how much you can take out annually without any penalty . Often it is 10 percent per year , after the first year . If you withdraw above the penalty-free withdrawal amount , you will pay a penalty . This annuity schedule is part of the contract and if you have questions about how to interpret , contact the agent that sold you the annuity or another qualified agent . Taxes will likely apply to any withdrawals at your ordinary income tax rate for that year . Also remember that if your annuity is a non-qualified account -LRB- not a Roth or IRA -RRB- and you withdraw prior to age 591/2 , the first dollars you withdraw will be considered your gain and be taxed at whatever your ordinary tax rate is for that year . There are ways to avoid the penalty -LRB- not the tax -RRB- for the withdrawal under section 72 -LRB- t -RRB- of the IRS code but you would have to agree to take level distributions until age 591/2 or for 5 years , whichever is longer . If you do n't follow this rule , you will be subject to a 10 % penalty going back to when you started early withdrawals from your annuity . Annuities can be a great product when the `` fit '' is correct . Your agent should make sure it is suitable upfront for your specific needs so you can avoid getting into an early withdrawal situation .
While the answer is - `` YES '' , you can combine annuities - it is important to bear in mind that some annuities have different tax treatment than others . My advice is to only combine annuity money of a similar nature with that of another . For example , an IRA -LRB- individual Retirement Account -RRB- provides a deduction on the IRS 1040 against income . Because of this feature and tax benefit , all money coming out of an IRA , both interest and basis , are taxed as income upon distribution . In other words , because of the tax deduction , distributions from an IRA are taxed as if all the money coming from the account is being taxed for the first time . An ordinary tax qualified annuity , a non-IRA annuity , incurs taxation only on the gain at the time of distribution . This exclusion formula recognizes that some of the money deposited was already taxed as ordinary income when you first earned it and this money will not be taxed again at distribution . That is why I suggest honoring the character of the money and keeping IRA 's with IRA 's , etc. . This simple rule of thumb will help relieve you of explaining years later the source or the money and help you argue successfully that some money should not be taxed . Who among us will remember 30-40 years hence how these accounts were merged ? There are a whole other set of rules for conversions and methods to avoid taxation prior to annuitization and the beginning of the payout period of your annuities . This answer covers general theory only on the idea you want to minimize taxation to the largest extent possible .
Generally , none if proper steps are taken . Life insurance death benefit proceeds received by a beneficiary are income tax-free in most cases . This is a key feature of life insurance . Common exceptions include business-owned life insurance issued , or materially modified , after August 17 , 2006 which may be taxable unless specific steps are taken during time of application and annually thereafter to meet conditions which allow the proceeds to be income tax-free . Another exception is a tax trap where life insurance contracts with three parties involved may also have unexpected taxable implications . Beyond the death benefit tax-free characteristics , the cash values have important tax aspects as well . Cash value builds free of tax . If the policy-owner accesses cash values via withdrawals of some of the cash value -LRB- after policy year 15 -RRB- , the amounts are income tax-free return of basis -LRB- premiums paid -RRB- in the contract . After that , the gain would be income taxable . Special tax rules exist for distributions in the first 15 policy years . If the policy-owner accesses cash values by taking a policy loan , the amounts would be income tax-free . As long as the policy is not lapsed prior to the net death benefit being paid , the policy loans are never taxed . If there is a large loan and the policy is allowed to lapse , income tax would be due that year on all of the gain in the contract . In the event of a full surrender of the policy for its cash value , there would be income tax to the extent of gain in the contract .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is A Good Renters Insurance Company ?
The best homeowners insurance policy is the one that you own when you suffer a loss . It is the only policy that you can turn to for relief . Having a policy in force is critical . That policy is sold by an insurance agent who will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . Setting appropriate limits is the most critical task the agent will help you do .
A good Renters Insurance Company is one that is well rated , financially stable and provides the necessary coverage for your Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- and ample Personal Liability Coverage . We recommend sufficient contents coverage to replace your furniture , appliances and clothing and also the highest available personal liability coverage available ; in many cases the premium difference between the minimum and maximum amount of liability may be as little as $ 35 per yeardepending on the geographic location of the insured risk . Should you be seeking a lower premium , we suggest raising the deductible rather than lowering your necessary coverage . Taking a little more risk on the front end will prove to lower your premium substantially as the majority of longer term insured customers take the higher deductible options , enjoy a lower premium and thus remain loyal to the respective carrier for a long time . There is a link available to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States.for those that would rather shop the riskand buy insurance online without the personal interaction of an insurance agent , this may prove very helpful.An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Good renters insurance pays a claim to the greatest extent possible and makes you whole when you suffer a loss . This is true whether it is loss due to fire , or loss due to lawsuit . Good renters insurance also meets the requirements of your landlord . The place to buy good renters insurance is from a trusted insurance agent . This agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice , and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . Premium is a secondary consideration .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
There are quite a few good insurance companies out there . What you want to do is look at financial ratings to get an idea of the quality of a carrier . Carriers pay financial ratings companies to review their books and assign a letter grade as a representation of the company 's quality . Different ratings agencies view companies with a different pov , so it is always good when choosing a good company to find one that has been reviewed by several ratings companies . You might want to check with your state insurance commissioner 's office to see what complaints or fines have been applied to companies . The good thing to know , is there are a lot of companies that are good out there . That is where the strength of the insurance industry is . Not just a few companies , but many companies of quality .
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Yes , a landlord can require a tenant to purchase renters insurance . Landlords are responsible for insurance that covers the dwelling , but renters are responsible for their belongings.Renters can also be held liable for any injuries that happen in the dwelling , which would be covered by the renters insurance . Since renters insurance is so inexpensive , it 's always a good idea to have renters insurance , rather than risk losing everything .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
To find good life insurance , find a good broker . He or she will help you determine what is good for you . What amount ... what cost ... what carrier are good for you ? A good broker will help you find out - and find this all out before you apply , so you can be confident of the outcome of underwriting . Good life insurance is a policy you are glad to buy .
You will find renters insurance to be very inexpensive . With most companies renter insurance covering approximately $ 5,000 to $ 10,000 in personal contents and $ 300,000 in personal liability to be approximately $ 150 to $ 300 dollars a year which is equivalent to about $ 12.50 to $ 25 dollars a month . Depending on the carrier this could vary . By writing a renters policy not only are you getting coverage for your personal belongings but you are also getting personal liability coverage . Some companies also include additional coverage such as host liquor liability , which you would need to rent halls for events like a wedding or a birthday . You may also be able to schedule things such as your cell phone which may or may not be cheaper then purchasing the coverage from your cell phone carrier . You will find that if you purchase your renters policy through the same carrier as your auto insurance that the discount you receive on your auto insurance will more than pay for your renters policy . Multi-policy discounts with some companies can range from 5 % -20 % or possibly more , which can save you hundreds on your auto insurance . So be sure to talk to your insurance agent about writing a renters policy and what discounts are available .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance With Sleep Apnea ?
Yes , most people with sleep apnea can get life insurance . If mild and controlled by regular use of Cpap or bipap , or if the sleep apnea has been corrected by surgery , the applicant can even be rated Preferred for some life insurance policies . Severe sleep apnea that is not controlled , or when there is no follow up or Cpap is not used as directed , the policy can be rated up or even declined .
Depending upon if your sleep apnea is mild and controlled , not severe and uncontrolled , you should be able to secure life insurance coverage at standard offers or better . Some sleep apnea can be corrected with surgery and some life insurance companies are benevolent because it was corrected . The real problem is diagnosed uncontrolled sleep apnea with no Cpap machine , that can cause dramatically affect an underwriting offer or outright declination .
Can you get life insurance with sleep apnea ? Yes , it is possible to obtain life coverage while having sleep apnea , but chances are the class will be standard or lower . Sleep apnea is an unpredictable outcome illness as it can be the begining of other serious coniditions . Someone with sleep apnea must show good control , consistent use of their c-pap machine -LRB- currently 50 % of the people stop using their cpap after one year . -RRB- and not have issues elsewhere .
Sleep apnea usually affects life insurance rates , but there are a handful of companies that can rate as good as Preferred or better with very mild , very well controlled sleep apnea , or sleep apnea that has been corrected by surgery . In the case of moderate to severe sleep apnea , uncontrolled sleep apnea -LRB- still having symptoms of excessive daytime sleepiness or not using Cpap or other treatment regularly -RRB- , or sleep apnea that has not been followed up to see if it is controlled , the rate for life insurance can be substantially higher or the policy can be declined . To get the most affordable sleep apnea life insurance rates , get a follow up study done after being put on treatment , use Cpap or other treatment plans every day , and if you have high blood pressure as a result of your sleep apnea , get it under control with medication . Keep in mind that your sleep apnea life insurance rate will also be based on your weight and other health and risk factors .
The things that can affect your ability to get a medically underwritten life insurance policy with sleep apnea are as follows . Keep in mind that there are still simplified issue policies available for most people with the following sleep apnea problems . 1 -RRB- Severe obstructive sleep apnea that can not be well controlled 2 -RRB- Central sleep apnea with complications 3 -RRB- Not using treatment -LRB- Cpap , Bipap , etc -RRB- faithfully 4 -RRB- Not having a follow up sleep apnea test after being diagnosed 5 -RRB- Having symptoms that can not be resolved -LRB- daytime sleepiness , etc -RRB- For mild sleep apnea with successful and regular treatment , or corrected by surgery , Preferred rates are available .
If sleep apnea is mild and controlled , it has little effect on life insurance rates with some companies . If it is severe and there are still symptoms of sleep apnea -LRB- daytime sleepiness , high blood pressure , etc -RRB- , then life insurance with a medical underwritten policy may not be attainable . In that case there are simplified issue policies that would work . Most sleep apnea cases fall somewhere in between . If a follow up sleep study has been done , use of Cpap or other treatment is consistent , and symptoms of sleep apnea are resolved , the person with sleep apnea can get traditional life insurance at moderate rates .
Yes , there are many life insurance options for people with sleep apnea . However , the price can vary a lot depending on your type of sleep apnea and level of control . Mild obstructive sleep apnea that is well controlled with cpap or bipap can be rated as good as Preferred or better with some companies . At the other extreme , severe sleep apnea with noncompliance with treatment and no alleviation of symptoms , can result in a decline for medically underwritten policies . Consulting an agent very familiar with life insurance coverage for persons with sleep apnea can make a big difference in amount of coverage you can get , and in the price you pay .
There are some life insurance companies that can rate as good as Preferred for mild sleep apnea that is regularly and well controlled by ventilation therapy . Moderate and severe obstructive sleep apnea will incur a higher cost , and generally require a follow up sleep study at least one year after diagnosis to show that sleep apnea symptoms have gone away with consistent use of Cpap , Bipap or other treatment . Central sleep apnea , uncontrolled sleep apnea , or very severe OSA may be declined by traditional policies , but can qualify for some simplified issued policies .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I get life insurance if I have sleep apnea ? Well the answer is many times yes , but I need to know some answers to some questions . Are you using a CPAP machine , or a BiPAP machine , as well as what 's your height and weight , and have you used tobacco in the last 12 months ? I also need to know the date or age of first diagnosis , and whether the sleep apnea was diagnosed as obstructive , central , mixed , or unknown . As well as was the sleep apnea diagnosed as mild , moderate , or severe and then the date of the last sleep study that you have undergone . All these factors will be able to give us a great idea of which carrier to go to . Remember certain carriers are more benevolent with sleep apnea when it comes to pricing life insurance .
Yes , you can get life insurance with sleep apnea . If your sleep apnea is mild and has been controlled by Cpap or some other treatment , and showed stability with a follow up sleep study a year or so later , you can be rated as good as Preferred with some carriers . Severe sleep apnea that does not have successful treatment is the worst case scenario . Contacting an agency with experience in writing life insurance for persons with sleep apnea will help you get the best rate .
Can you get life insurance with sleep apnea ? Yes , it is possible to obtain life coverage while having sleep apnea , but chances are the class will be standard or lower . Sleep apnea is an unpredictable outcome illness as it can be the begining of other serious coniditions . Someone with sleep apnea must show good control , consistent use of their c-pap machine -LRB- currently 50 % of the people stop using their cpap after one year . -RRB- and not have issues elsewhere .
Yes , sleep apnea will effect your life insurance rates and can possibly cause you to be declined for underwritten life insurance . The apnea does n't scare underwriters as bad as the risk of having sleep apnea . The lack of REM sleep needed to rest and recharge the body causes many problems such as high blood pressure , cardiac issues , breathing issues and a elevated risk of accidents due to dosing or lack of attention due to lack of REM sleep .
Sleep apnea can affect one 's rate class . Sleep apnea is diagnosed by having a `` sleep study '' done . The condition is scored based on how many `` episodes '' a person has over a certain period of time , usually per hour . Severe sleep apnea is a contributor to other health issues and has been shown to be a serious risk .
Many health insurance plans will pay for a sleep study if your sleep patterns are tied to a covered medical condition . Sleep apnea is a condition that is usually diagnosed via a sleep study . Sleep apnea can be a contributing factor in obesity , memory lapse , depression , persistent sluggishness and heart conditions .
Sleep apnea can affect life insurance ratings on premiums . The severity of the sleep apnea can effect coverage from a standard issue to a decline for coverage . The underwriters are more concerned with the symptoms associated with the sleep apnea . If it is causing high blood pressure , insomnia , depression , etc. and not controlled most carriers would decline . If it is controlled surgically or with a Cpap machine the rating would be minimal .
Medicare does pay for testing for sleep apnea . There are four types of sleep study tests , and the treating physician must determine which is most cost effective and medically necessary for the sleep apnea testing for that particular patient . The testing can take place in or out of a sleep study lab .
Yes , Medicare will cover Cpap supplies for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea . When first being evaluated , Medicare will pay for three months of Cpap usage and supplies on a trial basis . Once it it determined that obstructive sleep apnea is the cause of sleep symptoms , and that Cpap therapy works in alleviating those symptoms , Medicare will extend the coverage period for which they will pay for Cpap machine and supplies .
Yes , most people with sleep apnea can get life insurance . If mild and controlled by regular use of Cpap or bipap , or if the sleep apnea has been corrected by surgery , the applicant can even be rated Preferred for some life insurance policies . Severe sleep apnea that is not controlled , or when there is no follow up or Cpap is not used as directed , the policy can be rated up or even declined .
New York Life has a great many insured with sleep apnea . How is it affecting your life ? Are there other diagnoses that are of concern . If you simply have sleep apnea and need no treatment , you very well are likely to be covered easily .
Your sleep apnea must have been diagnosed by a physician and verified by a doctor prescribed sleep study in a Medicare approved facility . Some mild forms of apnea can be treated with devices , weight loss , cessation of tobacco use . But in some cases surgery may provide relief . If your condition warrants it , Medicare will pay for surgery . Your doctor can advise you about your options .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Home Insurance Pay For Tree Removal ?
Homeowners insurance will not typically pay for removal of trees . This is normally considered a maintainance issure for the homeowner . Please read your policy completely to understand what coverage is provided and what exclusions it may contain or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
This is really more of a legal question than an insurance question but I 'll give you some guidelines . As a general rule , if it 's on your property , it 's your responsibility . So , legally , if it 's your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , he should take care of it . This does n't always happen , and many small battles have ensued over just this type of thing . I 've seen neighbors do some pretty weird things in these situations . I 've seen people send registered letters , call the police , report to the city or township , even hire a lawyer to sue . My advice , be reasonable and talk to your neighbor , preferably before it falls , and come to some aggreement about what needs to be done , if anything . From an insurance standpoint , nothing 's really going to be done with a fallen tree unless it falls on something an causes damage . Then , in most cases , your insurance company will pay to move it off of your home , that 's it . Some homeowners policies will have endorsements available for debris removal which may pay to remove it , usually up to some limit . Many times , though , removing it from a structure is all an insurance company will do and removing the tree from your property is your responsibility .
While in most cases it will not cover the tree itself it will cover the damage caused by a downed tree and if necessary removal of the tree from the damaged structure . If a tree falls on your house , the damage will be covered and the tree removed . The tree itself will not be replaced .
It 's the homeowner 's responsibility to remove dead or damaged trees before they fall . Homeowners insurance will not cover dead or damaged trees . Homeowners insurance will cover resulting damage and the cost to cut up the tree if the trees falls on covered property . If a tree falls over but does not hit covered property , there is no coverage . If your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , your neighbor is only responsible for the portion of the tree located on his property . The portion of the tree on your property is your responsibility even though it 's not your tree .
Most insurance policies will require a tree hit something like a house , fence , or another structure for the removal of the tree to be covered . If the tree simply falls down in the yard it will not be covered for removal by most insurance policies . Some policies provide coverage for the value of the tree . You should read your policy or call your local independent insurance agent to find out exactly hose your policy reads . Hope this answer helps .
If the demise of the tree was naturally occuring then homeowners insurance will not cover the removal . That would be considered a maintenance issue and homeowners insurance does n't cover maintenance . However if the tree came down on and damaged the home , some coverage would be provided under the debris removal clause of the policy . Lightning damage to trees is also covered by most comprehensive policies , though a low $ $ limit of coverage is provided . Check with your local insurance professional .
Because tree root damage is a process that happens over a period of time tree root damage would not be a covered loss . Covered losses would fall under sudden and accidental . Tree root damage is neither sudden nor accidental . In fact the damage is actually preventable if the tree is properly maintained or removed if necessary . Keep in mind , a tree is just a plant and your plants needs to be kept up . As beautiful as they are sometimes you have to take the ax to the tree .
Homeowners Insurance will not pay for dead tree removal . A tree is a plant and it is the homeowners obligation to show pride of ownership and to take care of his or her yard . Big plant or small it 's the homeowners responsibility to maintain . Also a dead tree just sitting there and has not caused any damage to the dwelling , therefore there is no claim . I know what your thinking . The tree is a potential hazard and could fall on the house and cause damage or hurt someone . If this were to happen and you were unaware of any potential hazard there would be coverage should the tree fall on your house . However , if you are aware the tree is a hazard and fail to mitigate the hazard you are negligent and are not living up to your obligation as a homeowners and risk having the claim denied .
It may . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . If for example , yoo have a tree that you KNEW was severely diseased or dead and did nothing about removing it . If a storm came up and blew that tree down and onto your neighbor 's home or cars , then you very well could be considered negligent in maintaining your property and therefore it might be possible that coverage would be found in the Liability portion of your policy . Change that to a perfectly healthy tree . The storm comes up and there are embedded micro bursts that simply knock the tree over and onto the neighbor 's home or cars . In that scenario , you are more than likely not liable for the damage because there would be no negligence on your part .
Homeowner 's policies vary a LOT so the only way to know for sure is to file a claim . This question in particular is very tricky but as a general guideline tree removal will be covered -LRB- to a limit -RRB- if what caused the tree to fall was something sudden and accidental such as a windstorm or a lightning . On the other hand if the tree just died of disease or old age its removal will probably not be covered .
IF you are looking to your homeowners policy to cover maintenance on your property , you will not find relief . The policy provides coverage for damages from specific perils . However , if a tree fell onto your house , the removal of the tree would be covered under debris removal . Keeping an unsafe tree on your property could prompt your insurance company to non-renew your coverage , so it should be dealt with as soon as possible .
Unless the tree has come down and caused damage to a portion of your home or other real property , you will probably find that tree removal as an effort of maintaining your property will not be covered under a Homeowners ' policy . Under the conditions I mentioned earlier , you should check with your insurance professional to see about some coverage for removal as a part of the damage claim .
Homeowners insurance does not cover tree roots . There is nocoveragefor removal and no coverage for damage caused by tree roots . Damage to your dwelling must be sudden and accidental . Tree roots cause problems over a long period of time and in most cases the problem is evident way before it becomes a big issue . A tree is nothing more then a plant that should be maintained by the homeowner . I suggest discussion the specific details of the tree root problem with your local agent .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Typical policies cover fallen trees if they cause property damage , and if they fall due to a covered peril such as wind , lighting , etc. . If a tree just falls in the yard and does not damage anything then usually the policy will not cover the removal of the tree or a replacement tree . It must cause damage and be caused by a covered peril . Hope this helps .
No homeowners insurance will no cover tree root damage . Tree root damage is something that occurs over a period of time . A covered claim would need to be sudden and/or accidental and tree root damage is not sudden . Trees are just a big plant and plants need to be maintained . If they appear to be getting out of hand they need to be trimmed or removed .
It may , at least in part , cover this . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . Policies can provide for coverage so long as the tree has fallen and caused damage to real property , for example , your house or storage shed . In cases such as this , the policy would pay to remove the tree andrepair the damage to the affected property and for the cutting up and removal of the debris . This would however all be subject to your Homeowners ' deductible and the coverage provided may be limited to a specific dollar amount .
Basically , the issue comes down to the health of the tree . If for example , it is healthy and the thing just comes down during a heavy storm , then there is no liability on the part of your neighbor . If on the other hand , the tree is not healthy AND your neighbor knows it , then if the tree comes down , that becomes a question of negligence and therefore your neighbor 's responsibility . There is another element to be considered , however , if the thing falls and hits nothing but the ground , there more than likely will not be any coverage to cut up and remove it on either your neighbor 's or your policy . A claim is triggered if the tree comes down and damages a structure or a vehicle .
The company pays for everything for which you become liable by law involving bodily injury or property damage . The company will defend you in such a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . The company makes you whole if you lose personal property due to a covered loss . It pays for your personal property while you are in school . It pays for additional living costs if your unit is unfit because of a covered loss . It pays for the removal of your property to avoid further damage . It pays for removal of debris in the event of an insured loss . It pays for fire department charges . It also pays for trees , plants and shrubs , grave markers and improvements you make to the unit . There are other coverages which are included and others which are optional .
Actually , that depends upon a couple of factors . Your friend apparently has homeowners ' insurance which would include liability coverage , so one factor seems to be met . The question then becomes about the condition of your friend 's tree . If the tree is healthy and is just taken down or damaged in a passing storm , then your friend 's policy would not cover the damage to your boat . If on the other hand , the tree is dead or diseased AND your friend knows it AND has done nothing to remove or have the affected branches pruned away , your friend would be seen as negligent . If that is the case , then the liability portion of his Homeowners ' policy would provide coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Apply For Life Insurance Online ?
You can apply for life insurance online in several ways . Sometimes you can fill out the entire application online . More commonly , you find a quote online , then an agent contacts you to be sure you qualify for that quote . Sometimes agents can even find you a lower quote than what you found on their own website . That personal contact can help in many ways , so do n't shy away if you are contacted after attempting to apply online . One phone call can be all it takes to get you on the road with the right application , and after that you may never need to speak to the agent again .
Yes you can apply for life insurance online . The life insurance industry is going through a very trying transition right now . The average career life insurance agent right now is over 50 years of age and the total number of agents is quickly declining . This is happening because more people like you are looking for life insurance online . The important thing for anyone who is a just starting the life insurance process to consider is that your buying experience will certainly be very different if you buy life insurance online versus contacting a local agent . Not better or worse , but different . Thinking about how you prefer to do business may help you decide which route to take . Are you part of the connected generation ? If your average day includes texting and Skype or FaceTime you will be perfectly comfortable buying your life insurance online . Do n't be concerned that you will be stuck with some impersonal call center . There are plenty of great online insurance agents that provide personal service . The only difference between them and your local agent is that your communication will be via your smart phone , not in person . If you 're not into the latest technology and you feel that personal interaction requires a handshake , you probably wo n't be comfortable getting life insurance online . You may find the process cold and impersonal . Do n't worry . Even though they 're getting older , there are plenty of great local life insurance agents that will give you advice and personal service your way . Many of them still make house calls and transact business over your kitchen table . The most important thing is not where you get life insurance , it 's that you do get life insurance . Good luck to you whichever route you choose :-RRB-
Yes you can apply for a life insurance policy online . But a more important question is : what type of life insurance will best fit your goals ? Then there are a whole collection of optional riders you will want to at least consider . Some types of life insurance you can apply for online without even having to have a medical exam , but the greater number of available policies require a `` field underwriter '' as well as some kind of medical exam . I recommend you consult with an insurance adviser/broker that can help you find the right policy for your goals .
That is a great question ! You can find anything on the internet these days , and certainly life insurance is on there for the taking . I 'm not a big fan of buying it on the internet , but I do think it 's good to research and comparison shop on it . Here 's why I do n't recommend buying online : 1 . -RRB- If you apply on line , the price you are quoted is almost always the `` best price '' scenario . It may be quite different from the actual price the policy comes to you with , after the prescription , MIB and underwriting processes are completed . A live agent will have discussed this with you , and in most cases can give you an exact quote . 2 . -RRB- If there is an issue with your health , and you are declined more than once , this becomes a red flag for any other company that you will apply with . Again , a live agent can prevent this from happening by steering you toward an appropriate policy/company . 3 . -RRB- Maybe I 'm a little old fashioned , but the protection of my family still means a lot to me . I 'm not comfortable putting my information out there on the web , especially with the almost daily revelations of who 'd been hacked months ago that we 're just now being told about . Add to that the horrendous experiences with on-line customer service , and I 'm not counting on them to answer in an emergency . I want a live body answering my call . I hope that helps you , thank you for asking !
You can absolutely apply for life insurance online . Just be careful . Some tips you need to be aware of before putting your personal information into an insurance quoting site . 1 -RRB- Be sure the website is secure -LRB- WEBSITELINK 2 -RRB- Know the source of the site . A lot of quoting sites are just `` lead '' sites . This means this company will sell your information to insurance agents all over the country . It is not uncommon for a consumer to receive 40 calls and emails per day from agents `` selling '' insurance for weeks and even months . 3 -RRB- Understand that most online sites show you the best possible rate `` best preferred '' when quoting . Only about 5 % of people qualify for that rate and chances are yours will be much higher . I recommend using an independent trusted advisor that will professionally shop the market to get you the best rate at the best price for your unique situation .
Yes you can apply for life insurance online . The life insurance industry is going through a very trying transition right now . The average career life insurance agent right now is over 50 years of age and the total number of agents is quickly declining . This is happening because more people like you are looking for life insurance online . The important thing for anyone who is a just starting the life insurance process to consider is that your buying experience will certainly be very different if you buy life insurance online versus contacting a local agent . Not better or worse , but different . Thinking about how you prefer to do business may help you decide which route to take . Are you part of the connected generation ? If your average day includes texting and Skype or FaceTime you will be perfectly comfortable buying your life insurance online . Do n't be concerned that you will be stuck with some impersonal call center . There are plenty of great online insurance agents that provide personal service . The only difference between them and your local agent is that your communication will be via your smart phone , not in person . If you 're not into the latest technology and you feel that personal interaction requires a handshake , you probably wo n't be comfortable getting life insurance online . You may find the process cold and impersonal . Do n't worry . Even though they 're getting older , there are plenty of great local life insurance agents that will give you advice and personal service your way . Many of them still make house calls and transact business over your kitchen table . The most important thing is not where you get life insurance , it 's that you do get life insurance . Good luck to you whichever route you choose :-RRB-
You can apply for life insurance online in several ways . Sometimes you can fill out the entire application online . More commonly , you find a quote online , then an agent contacts you to be sure you qualify for that quote . Sometimes agents can even find you a lower quote than what you found on their own website . That personal contact can help in many ways , so do n't shy away if you are contacted after attempting to apply online . One phone call can be all it takes to get you on the road with the right application , and after that you may never need to speak to the agent again .
To apply for Medicare Part B online , you can go to the website medicare.gov . There you will find explanations about what to apply for , when to apply , and how to apply for it . Then you will be directed to an online form that you can use to submit your application electronically .
Your insurance is only as good as your agent . An Agent can provide you personal service as most online carriers you can not get this type of service . In many cases you can get a better rate from an agent because they listen to you and what our needs and make sure you are properly covered . I have thousands of time Beat the online rate with the same carrier even . It really comes down to personal preference . Some say they like the online because it is 24/7 That is ok also But our clients We personally answer the phone 24/7 I can count on 1 hand how many times a client has ever had to leave a voicemail . If your looking for just numbers and no service then by all means online is the way to go just make sure that you are properly covered and also make sure that they can even sell insurance in your state . I ca n't begin to count how many people I know that have purchased online because a of a banner ad they clicked or got in their email and purchased coverage then found out later after a claim that that carrier is not allowed to even sell in our state hence no coverage and out of the money they spent on a policy . Or worse yet bought a policy online and it was not even a real company now days the scammers are out there buyer beware .
It is best to obtain a Free #HomeInsurance quote online and then apply to purchase your Homeowners Insurance directly online . Stillwater Insurance Group provides an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
When you go to buy a life insurance policy online , you will run into a number of options . From the most to least automated , here are some of them . 1 -RRB- You put your information into an online application and your policy is issued within minutes . I have seen these websites come and go and am not sure how many exist online at this time . Premiums are comparatively high because they do little to no medical underwriting , and everyone may be lumped together at the same price . It puts a lot of responsibility on the individual to read the fine print . 2 -RRB- You enter your information online and get a quote . At this time , you fill out an application with an agent over the phone , or fill out the app online and then do a phone interview with the life insurance company . Because this type of policy digs a little deeper , premiums are more competitive . I like this option for people who are in a hurry or who hate to fill out paperwork . I do recommend at least talking to an agent before filling out the application with the company , as an agent can steer you in another direction if there is something in your profile that would cause you to be declined or rated up . 3 -RRB- You get a quote online , then email or talk to an agent to determine whether that is your best rate . Then you are mailed or emailed an application that you can complete and fax , mail or email back . There may or may not be an exam involved . At the end , you have a policy just like you would have had if you had gone to a local insurance office . This is a good choice for large face amounts and for people with health conditions . It allows us agents to be involved from the get go so that we can prevent problems and make sure the policy is issued at your best possible rate . The best part about buying life insurance online is being able to do it all from the comfort and convenience of your home . You can make it as automated or personal as you like . I hope the above helps you determine what option is best for you .
Go to WEBSITELINK to apply for Medicare online . This page is the government page to apply for Medicare online . You can not use this page is you want to activate your social security at the same time . This page is for Medicare online enrollment only . If you already have Medicare Part A and want to sign up for Medicare Part B you should call Social Security at -LRB-800-RRB-772-1213 to activate your Part B coverage .
Yes you can apply for a life insurance policy online . But a more important question is : what type of life insurance will best fit your goals ? Then there are a whole collection of optional riders you will want to at least consider . Some types of life insurance you can apply for online without even having to have a medical exam , but the greater number of available policies require a `` field underwriter '' as well as some kind of medical exam . I recommend you consult with an insurance adviser/broker that can help you find the right policy for your goals .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
You should buy term life insurance from an independent agent because they can review options from multiple companies . Captive agents generally only offer you their company first before looking at other options . Some people prefer to buy online so they `` do n't have to be bothered '' with the process of buying insurance . However , this can often result in you not getting the best product for your needs because you do n't know what risk class you would qualify for from each company . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines and not every company is going to offer you the same risk class - e.g. company A could offer preferred and company B could offer standard . Online instant quotes only provide numbers based off of given criteria and there 's no guarantee you would qualify for it - in short , they are just rough estimates . You need to understand what risk class you would most likely qualify for from each company before applying - simply put , not everyone gets the preferred plus rates -LRB- which is what many people will quote themselves when running instant online quotes -RRB- . Also , applying to multiple companies at the same time can often work against you . Independent agents can help you through every step of the process in great detail and provide you with much more accurate quotes than what you may be looking at on your own . If I can help you out with your life insurance needs or if you have any other questions , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
To buy life insurance online , you want to be certain that you are working with a reputable agency . Look at their `` About Us '' information to see if they have concrete contact information , some staff listed , testimonials , Better Business Rating , etc. . If you start with a good agency , the rest will take care of itself . You can review quotes by playing around with online quote engines . Some will allow you to see the quote instantly and input different face amounts and variables . But keep in mind that no quoter can cover all the details , so you will need to call the agency -LRB- or at least email back and forth a few times -RRB- to get an accurate quote . Starting out with the right quote and company will save you lots of time and frustration . When it is time to apply , some applications are done totally online . Some are done partially online and partially by phone with the carrier . Some are paper applications that you can fax or mail back . Your agent will guide you to the one that works best for you and helps you reach the outcome of your best price . Once the underwriting process is over , you will receive word of your approval . In our agency , we allow you to make changes to the policy at that time , if you like , so that you end up with the exact policy and price that you want . Each online life insurance site is different , but you will end up with a policy that is just like you would have gotten from a brick and mortar shop .
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
If you decide to buy life insurance online , let me clarify one important point about the cost . Whether you go to my website , any other insurance website , or meet with any agent in the country , the price for a particular insurance policy will be the exact same , regardless of where you buy it . Life insurance premiums are fixed by the insurance company and no one is given preferential pricing . I think it can be helpful to do some initial research online , but it is of utmost importance to discuss your particular situation with a knowledgeable agent . You can run insurance quotes on many websites , but the cost is only an estimate until the insurance company approves your rate class and the policy . I have seen several instances where someone sees a low price , goes through the application process , and gets a different rating than they applied for . Then the premium is much more expensive than what they first saw . This could have been prevented by speaking with an agent first who can do some preliminary underwriting and guide that client toward a company that will offer the highest rating and lowest premium for their unique circumstances . My advice for purchasing life insurance online would be to work with a knowledgeable advisor who can help you sort through the many options . The price will be the same and the advice and guidance will be free .
Comparing auto insurance rates online is a great way to save money and find the best deals in your area . Finding the best prices does n't have to take a lot of time since a reputable website will do that for you . Carinsurancezoom.org is one of the premier trusted resources for quickly finding , comparing and applying for auto insurance coverage . There are no fees or costs when using the website . Of course , there are many online options when shopping for coverage . A US-based website operated by experienced brokers is an absolute must . And of course , being able to access the major companies on one website instead searching multiple websites is also helpful . Once you have viewed your online prices , typically , you can get assistance online or via email from the site owner and their staff . Of course , it 's always important to be aware of the cancellation date of your existing policy to avoid any lapse in coverage .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Why Does Renters Insurance Cost So Much In New York ?
Probably because the actuaries in Underwriting have calculated the risk of something happening to property in NY to be higher than in Wyoming . With millions of people , there is much more likelihood of a burglary or other perils befalling a tenant . I do n't know for sure if you are talking about in Manhattan , but if you are another possible reason is that the premium is calculated in part by the value of the Personal Property . People living on 5th Avenue tend to have more - and more expensive things than the Average Joe !
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
To buy life insurance in New York , you can go to a website that offers it , look through your Yellow Pages and call an agency , or ask friends , relatives or co-workers for a referral . When purchasing online , you can use the quote engines and put in New York to see if they offer policies there . New York has its own companies so not every agency does business there .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
No , Health Insurance DOES NOT cover Long Term Care . Long Term Care needs to be covered through either Long Term Care Insurance , or a Unique Product offered by New York Life called Asset Preserver . New York Life can provide you with Long Term Care Insurance in an extremely large variety of personalized policies , or an Asset Protector which will provide you with Both Life Insurance and Long Term Care in one product . Please call me , Gary Lane , New York Life Agent , for the details that can fit your exact needs .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Car insurance rates in New York are determined by many variables . Some of the most important factors are your driving record -LRB- including other family members -RRB- , your zip code or county , your age , the type of vehicle you drive , your credit history , how the vehicle is used and the types of coverage you carry . Additionally , the company you are insured with plays a big role in determining the rates . So ... how do you get a free quote for car insurance in New York ? A reputable nationwide -LRB- or New York based -RRB- car insurance website will zoom -LRB- pun intended -RRB- you to your destination . Typically , you can compare the best offers and get expert advice at no cost .
The AARP branded life insurance is actually New York Life . They just pay for the AARP branding . They go all the way to guaranteed issue so the only three questions on that are going to be 1 . What is your age ? 2 . What is your gender ? 3 . How much coverage do you want ? Anyone considering this policy would be well advised to keep looking . It 's probably the worst deal you can get . Most people can get a much lower premium and first day full coverage rather than accept the terms of a guaranteed issue policy . AARP often tries to sneak into the fine print `` Premiums are not guaranteed . You can not be singled out for a rate increase but we can increase them on all insureds . '' That is completely unacceptable . New York Life is wise to pay AARP to use their name to sell this . No one who reads it would ever accept that deal . But some AARP members trust the brand name so much they do n't read it .
Matt is correct . New York Life is an independent national insurance company . We are a mutual company , meaning our policy holders own our company , and we are not beholden to Stock Holders , so we can have lower rates and better service . In addition to Term Policies , we offer our flagship Whole Life Policies , along with Long Term Care Insurance , Annuities , Pension Replacements , College Funding , a variety of Retirement Plans . For details , call a New York Life Agent . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
Guardian Life Insurance Company of America is a mutual company based in New York City , New York . They also have regional offices all across the northern states , from Washington to New York . Rated A + + by AM Best , Guardian Life Insurance Company has several subsidiaries , including Berkshire Life Insurance Company of America .
Yes , absolutely you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . Without it you would not be following the regulations set by New York Department of Financial Services - Insurance Industry . Before obtaining a license to sell life insurance you must study , take a practice -LRB- proctored -RRB- exam and pass . Then , you must pass the ` real exam ' in order to get a license to sell life insurance in New York .
I am happy to report that New York Life is America 's oldest and largest Mutual Life Insurance Company in America . Being a Mutual Life Insurer , means there are no stockholders to try to please . The Owners are the Policy Holders . This can mean substantial savings for Policy Holders of a Mutual Life Insurer like New York Life . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 9497972424 .
The state of New York is one of the most highly regulated states in the country . Residents of New York general pay more for coverage . It 's critical in securing the best possible price tag by going online to a brokerage firm that has an extension inventory of New York approved careers to secure the best deal .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
New York Life has relationships with a number of other quality insurance companies to offer many products , including disability insurance . Through these arrangements , customers can work with a New York Life agent to obtain a wide variety of products not underwritten by New York Life itself . Disability insurance can provide peace of mind and removes the uncertainty in case of an accident or sickness that makes someone incapable of working . When considering such coverage , one should review both short term and long term options . Business should also consider Disability insurance for key business persons in the business .
Yes . New York Life is a top rated life insurance company . They are a mutual company which means they are owned by their policy owners not Wall Street investors . They are known for their excellent whole-life products . a different division of New York Life sells mail order life insurance which is co-branded by AARP . These are quite different from the New York Life products offered by their agents .
New York Homeowners Insurance cost will depend on what is being insured . Home Insurance covers the replacement cost of the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal liability and medical payments to others . The age , size and construction characteristics of the home will dictate the reconstruction cost which will be used as the Dwelling Coverage Amount . If you are looking for a lower premium than generated , we would recommend selecting a higher deductible option . The deductible does not apply to Liability and Medical Payment claims ; however , it is the amount deducted from a loss payout for physical loss to the dwelling , other structures and/or personal property as covered on the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy New York Home Insurance online ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Yes . Each state has it 's own department of insurance and sets it 's own requirements or compliances for all policies sold inside their particular state . Some states may look almost identical to other states requirement wise . Others like New York for example have very NY state specific rules that often require insurance companies setting up companies inside NY state . You might find ABC Insurance Carrier doing business in 49 states an ABC Insurance of New York doing business there . The state that I work in also is considered a pretty restrictive state for insurance companies . Restrictive is n't necessarily a bad thing . The idea is done with consumer protection in mind . For my state , it means new plan approval is much slower than other states , but the flip side of that is if a problem with a plan occurs , it usually has n't hit the `` streets '' in my state yet , so the consumers avoided a problem that way .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Hazard Insurance The Same As Homeowners Insurance ?
Yes hazard insurance is the same as homeowners insurance . It 's just different terms used by different people . So your lender may say homeowners insurance or hazard insurance or fire insurance and your talking about the same thing . This term may also be used by title companies as well . Usually it more of a location verbiage . Peoples in different areas just use different terms for the same thing .
Yes hazard insurance is the same as homeowners insurance . It 's just different terms used by different people . So your lender may say homeowners insurance or hazard insurance or fire insurance and your talking about the same thing . This term may also be used by title companies as well . Usually it more of a location verbiage . Peoples in different areas just use different terms for the same thing .
Homeowners Insurance will not pay for dead tree removal . A tree is a plant and it is the homeowners obligation to show pride of ownership and to take care of his or her yard . Big plant or small it 's the homeowners responsibility to maintain . Also a dead tree just sitting there and has not caused any damage to the dwelling , therefore there is no claim . I know what your thinking . The tree is a potential hazard and could fall on the house and cause damage or hurt someone . If this were to happen and you were unaware of any potential hazard there would be coverage should the tree fall on your house . However , if you are aware the tree is a hazard and fail to mitigate the hazard you are negligent and are not living up to your obligation as a homeowners and risk having the claim denied .
The mortgage company will require `` Hazard Insurance '' as part of your mortgage contract . In my experience they are looking for a homeowners insurance policy that will cover the replacement of the home . In the contract it usually states that if you fail to maintain hazard insurance they may purchase it on your behalf . So to answer the question is Hazard & Homeowners insurance the same . . the answer is yes-if you 're speaking about the mortgage requirements .
The basic definition of Homeowners Insurance is a hazard insurance or fire insurance policy provided for the primary residence of the titled owner of a property . Banks and mortgage companies simply name all policies ` Hazard Insurance ' as the building -LRB- dwelling -RRB- is the hazard ; many others simply refer to all policies as ` Fire Insurance ' as one of the basic perils covered is ` Fire ' . The correct terminology of the house insurance for the home you own and primarily reside in is called Homeowners Insurance . The Department of Insurance in all States refer to the Policy Form as a Homeowners Form , the basic policy form details are provided by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Mortgage companies and banks sometimes refer to Homeowners ' Insurance as `` Hazard '' insurance . Homeowners ' Insurance provides coverage in the event there is a loss caused by a `` hazard '' and thus the reference . Homeowners ' policies can covere a wide range of these hazards or perils , or can specifically limit the coverage in some cases .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
A hazard insurance policy is more often referred to as homeowner 's policy or property insurance policy . The term ` hazard insurance ' was commonly used to describe the coverages provided in the policy , in bygone days . Today , we most often hear of the coverages as those under a homeowner 's policy . Less frequently but fairly often , you may hear of ` property insurance ' . However , the policy covers more than just property so this term really does n't properly describe the policy . However , all three terms really mean the same thing . The homeowner policy provides reimbursement to the policyholder for damages from many natural perils , like fire , wind , and theft . It also provides some liability related coverages .
Interesting question ... Seems easy to answer by saying that both terms are generally used interchangeably with regard to insurance . This is true . We often see ` homeowners insurance ' , ` home insurance ' and ` hazard insurance ' intended to mean the same thing : the insurance coverages in standard homeowner policies issued in the U.S. . Since there are some perils that are excluded in homeowner polices , some carriers refer to their coverage forms for these -LRB- like flood -RRB- as ` hazard insurance ' policies . But , generally speaking ` homeowner insurance ' , ` home insurance ' and ` hazard insurance ' are terms that are commonly used interchangeably .
Homeowners Insurance is a form of Property Insurance . The Insurance Services Office publishes Insurance Forms which are basic coverage contracts sold asinsurance policies by insurance companies . Homeowners Insurance is the most common form of Property Insurance ; this form is generally written for Owner Occupied Single Family Homes but in some cases , it could apply to an Owner Occupied Duplex . To complicate matters further , mortgage companies do not differentiate the coverage form ; they simply define required insurance as ` Hazard Insurance ' ; the hazard being the risk or collateral against which the mortgage company has leant funds . If a single family home is owner occupied , a Homeowners Insurance Policy should be purchased ; if a 1 - 4 unit dwelling is tenant occupied , a Landlords Insurance Policy should be purchased . For residential apartments with 5 + units , a Commercial Form is required and in many cases can be written as a Residential Apartment Policy under a Business Owners Policy -LRB- BOP -RRB- package . For further clarification on the correct form of insurance , contact your insurance carrier or our office and we 'll be happy to answer any further questions .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
You can own a home without having homeowners insurance but more than likely you will need to maintain the coverage as a requirement of your mortgage contract . Most mortgage companies require `` Hazard Insurance '' to protect their investment in your home . If you fail to maintain `` Hazard Insurance '' , or commonly known as homeowners insurance , the mortgage company will put `` forced insurance '' on your home . The forced insurance policy will be much more expensive and will have inferior coverage . Some are even considered a `` single interest '' policy . This means that the mortgage company is the only beneficiary under the policy -LRB- you get nothing -RRB- . We do not recommend owning a home without homeowners insurance . For many people their home is their largest asset and you should protect it .
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
If you have a small house in a low hazard area the premium is low . If you have a small house in a high hazard area the premium is high . If you have a mid size home in a low hazard area the premium is moderate . If you have a mid size home in a high hazard area the premium is higher then the small house . If you have a large house in a low hazard area the premium is high . If you have a large house in a high hazard area I hope you have a good income . Without details there is no way to guess at a rate for any home in any given area .
When used in the context of a discussion of Home Insurance , yes it is . `` Hazard Insurance '' is a common term used to refer to Homeowners ' Insurance becauseit speaks to the broad `` hazards '' that such a policy insures against . Hazards such as wind , fire , lightning , wind driven rain , smoke , etc are common . Be sure to talk with your insurance professional to understand all of the coverage , limitations and options that your policy provides .
Homeowners is the most common form of hazard insurance . Hazard insurance covers property damage caused by fire , wind , storms , and other similar risks . Sometimes earthquakes and floods are also covered , however usually they are not . The term hazard insurance appears often in communications with a title insurance company .
Hazard Insurance is simply a term utilized by the mortgage industry for property insurance that secures the mortgagee interest in the collateral loaned against . Homeowners Insurance is a form of hazard insurance specifically tailored to the needs of the titled owner of his/her primary home . For more detailed information regarding homeowners insurance , please click on the following link : WEBSITELINK
Yes an insurance company can non-renew your homeowners insurance policy for several reasons . Main reasons are change in risk . This could be due to claims or hazards on your home that have increased and as a homeowner you fail to mitigate . In other words if the insurance carrier can no longer tolerate you as a risk the insurance carrier can chose non renew . Keep in mind all polices are self terminating at the end of a term and the insurance company can chose at that time to either offer a renewal or chose to not renew . This is not an actual cancellation . Cancellations are actually much more difficult . The only way a cancellation occurs is if you the insured fail to make a payment or often on a newly written policy a hazard was not dealt with or there was mis-representation on the application . These types of cancellations however fall on the insured and not the insurance provider .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Go To The ER Without Health Insurance ?
Yes , you sure can . How they will treat you when you get there is a different question . Most hospitals will treat you whether you have health insurance or not . There are some , however , that may not . In that case , they would send you you to the hospital that will treat you . It also depends on what you need . If it 's something minor , you may wait or they may send you to a different hospital . If it 's critical , they will either treat you there or stabilize you to go to a different hospital . Either way , they will bill you for their services and , the more serious the case , the more it will cost . If you 're considering going to the Emergency Room , you should take a moment and think about whether that 's the right place to go . There are many Urgent Care centers that can help you with more minor issues like fevers , sprained ankles , and minor injuries . You 'll probably get treated more quickly and it 'll cost a lot less .
Of course , you can go anywhere without health insurance . The question is `` What will they do with you when you show up in their ER ? '' If you arrive with a serious injury or presenting symptoms of a serious injury or medical event -LRB- like a heart attack -RRB- they are required to treat you . Showing up at the emergency room for a medical issue that is minor in nature and should be handled by a primary care physician , dentist or urgent/minor care center is another matter entirely and is one of the biggest problems and wastes of resources faced by ER departments . Any ER is going to engage in triage -LRB- determining who has the most serious problem and requires immediate attention versus persons with less pressing needs -RRB- and may direct you away or tell you to be prepared for a very long wait if your issue is minor . Your low grade fever and congestion may feel like an emergency to you but it pales in comparison to the person suffering from multiple traumas from an auto accident that is being wheeled in . In any event , the most expensive medical care you will ever receive is in the hospital 's emergency room . Yes , you can go without health insurance and in a situation of real need that is exactly what you should do . Just be prepared for a big bill when you do .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
Emergency rooms are considered outpatient care . It does not matter if they are attached to or affiliated with an acute care hospital , the ER is still outpatient . Even if you are admitted to the hospital via the ER , any bills accumulated as an ER patient are tabulated as outpatient . Medically necessary ER claims are covered under Medicare Part B .
Health insurance covers ER visits , although your portion of the treatment will vary . There are numerous available Exchange plans , including four different Metal tiers -LRB- and catastrophic -RRB- . Your deductible may apply to ER visits or perhaps just a simple copay or coinsurance . To make sure you 're getting the correct and best ER benefits allow experienced brokers -LRB- and our websites -RRB- to shop for you so you 're always getting the best pricing .
Anyone can go to the ER -LRB- emergency room -RRB- regardless of whether you have health insurance or not . Bear in mind the ER is not required to treat you -LRB- except in the case of life threatening medical conditions -RRB- unless you have the ability to pay your bill . EMTALA rules require hospitals to treat medical emergencies without first verifying if you have insurance or not .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
I do n't think anybody has the answer to that question . My assumption is that the benefits wo n't change much for 2 reasons : 1 -RRB- The Affordable Care Act mandated certain benefits - so those have to stay 2 -RRB- The other non-mandated benefits have always been a part of health insurance -LRB- hospitalization , ER , Dr Visits , etc -RRB- . Open enrollment starts Nov 15 , 2014 - so you can find out from your broker/agent then . I wonder how much the premiums will change . Seemingly they would go up since not enough `` young & healthy '' people applied for coverage to offset the claims made by everybody else . However , I understand that the carriers will have to determine 2015 rates before they have all the data . So it 's anybody 's guess .
Health insurance is vital for everyone . Even a person that is young and healthy can be involved in an accident . The average ER visit is around $ 1,300 while the average cost per hospital stay is over $ 10,000 . While health insurance can be very expensive , the new tax credits can reduce the cost significantly . Additionally , those under 30 can qualify for catastrophic coverage . These policies have lower monthly premiums and cover only preventive care and any costs over $ 6,350 per individual . This provides the lowest monthly premium while limiting out-of-pocket costs .
Is Medigap plan F the best ? Well it depends on what the person wants . I have found plan F to be great coverage from a plan that is used . I have my mom on F and we 've made visits over the years to the ER and extended stays for everything from heart issues to infusions and a few things in between . With all of these services , she has not had a bill to pay . Granted the premium is high , but the out of pocket is very low . The other aspect of F that I have witnessed first hand is the ability to switch doctors with ease . She has fired several doctors over the years , often in the same year . Other plans require a year 's commitment to a doctor to work . Plan F does n't . As with any Medicare decision , look at a couple ideas before deciding .
An important question in view of the growth in high deductible health plans as well as the growing number of health plan designs doing away with office visit and prescription drug copayments and making such services subject to the plan deductible and/or co-insurance . The trend is clearly for higher out-of-pocket health care expenses for many people . Properly designed GAP policies can help address many of potential medical out-of-pocket expenses a person might encounter . Poorly designed GAP policies can still leave the person with substantial out-of-pocket expenses . There are a wide variety of GAP policies currently available with more to come I am sure . The value and cost of a GAP policy will vary depending upon the type of coverage gap -LRB- s -RRB- you are trying to fill or minimize , the premium cost associated with the GAP policy , and what is covered under the GAP policy . Each individual will have to make a risk determination as to whether the amount of financial exposure is great enough and the probability of incurring covered claims is great enough to justify the GAP plan 's premium payment . Someone with office visit/urgent care and ER & prescription drug copays , a $ 1000 deductible and a $ 4000 out of-pocket maximum probably does n't need a GAP policy . On the other hand , someone with $ 6350 deductible and a two office visits/yr covered at a $ 50 copy - that person could probably use a GAP plan . Seek out an experienced , qualified health insurance broker to help you make the GAP policy decision and to find the GAP policy best suited to your needs if a GAP policy is an answer .
The NFL -LRB- National Football League -RRB- provides comprehensive health insurance coverage to its players through the Collective Bargaining Agreement . 100 % of all expenses -LRB- must stay in-network -RRB- are covered through the plan after a deductible and maximum out-of-pocket limit is reached . This includes major medical , office visits , prescriptions , ER , and many other items . Dental and vision benefits are also included in the package for both rookies and veterans . But most importantly , the coverage continues after the player has retired from the NFL and is no longer playing . This is extremely important considering the potential for chronic injuries and needed treatment . Important : Answer provided by Ed Harris , one of the nation 's leading health insurance brokers and football benefit experts with 35 years of experience . His website majormedicalhealth.com provides consumers with the free quotes and the lowest available rates from all major companies .
Your health insurance policy will cover a motorcycle accident , if it is a qualified Marketplace plan in your state . Typically , ER and other major medical expenses are part of the benefit package . A deductible and/or coinsurance may apply , depending on which tier of plans you chose . Physical damage to the motorcycle -LRB- collision and comprehensive -RRB- would only be provided on a separate policy . A federal subsidy may have been available to help you pay for coverage . Open Enrollment allows you to change plans and compare all available options . Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier Health Insurance Broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated consumer websites that offer the lowest available rates .
A health insurance deductible is very common . Typically , it is approximately $ 500 - $ 5,000 -LRB- Yes ... that is a big range -RRB- and it applied to major medical claims and often ER visits , inpatient surgeries and outpatient procedures . Usually , depending on the policy office visits and many prescriptions are not subject to the deductible . Of course , a higher deductible will lower your rates .
The usual beneficiaries of a life policy is the spouse or children however if a person has a financial interest as in business they to can be the beneficiary . . This is sometimes the case with a key man policy when a business co ers maybea FRi , top sales person based on their value to the business .
Most are concerned about unpaid bills from hospital stays . While it is true you can run up several thousand dollars in hospital bills within a few days , especially if you are admitted through the ER . Medicare Part A covers most of those bills after the deductible . The majority of unpaid bills fall under Medicare Part B.
Almost everyone needs Medicare Part B. Most people think of Part B as just for doctor visits , but the coverage is much broader in scope . Virtually ALL outpatient treatment falls under Part B. Doctor visits , MRI , CT , dialysis , outpatient surgery , ER treatment , infusion therapy . The list goes on and can get quite expensive .
Medicare Part B covers virtually all outpatient expenses including doctor visits , X-ray , MRI , CT , outpatient surgery , ER , ambulance and lab work . Part B has an annual deductible of $ 147 -LRB- for 2013 -RRB- and then Medicare pays 80 % of approved charges , you pay the remaining balance . If you have a Medigap plan your liability may be $ 0 if you have plan F
Original Medicare has deductibles and coinsurance for Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have a Medicare supplement plan N , you will have copay 's for outpatient expenses and ER visits . Plan N copay 's are limited to $ 20 or $ 50 . If you have a Medicare Advantage plan you will have copay 's for most medical services .
Medicare Part A covers most hospital INPATIENT charges . The operative word here is inpatient . The hospital ER -LRB- emergency room -RRB- is considered outpatient , even though it is physically attached to the hospital . If you are `` admitted '' for observation this is also an outpatient procedure , even if you are in observation for more than 24 hours . Outpatient expenses are covered under Medicare Part B.
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Drive Without Car Insurance ?
A vehicle may not be operated on the road without liability insurance . Being caught driving without insurance can and will result in significant fines and potential loss of your drivers license . If you are involved in an accident without insurance the fines and penalties are much stiffer not to mention the cost incurred for damages that you may be responsible for .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Driving without car insurance can have both legal and financial impacts upon your life . Caveat , this is geared towards Michigan drivers . Financially : if you get into a collision and are negligent , you could be sued for physical damages to the other driver/passengers . Without insurance you will be on the hook for the entire judgment against you . Furthermore , if you are driving a new car you will either be out the money you spent on the car , or you will owe the leasing company or lender the value of the car . Legal : in Michigan driving without proof of no-fault insurance can result in a $ 500 ticket and three points on your license . So you will be out $ 500 immediately , and a huge increase in your insurance upon renewal . This is assuming you will still have the same insurance and not get a non-renewal notice . I hope this helps .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
DO N'T drive a new car home without insurance ! Always make sure you have active insurance before driving your car , especially a new car . If you lease or get a loan on a car the finance department usually will not let your drive off of the lot without proof of insurance . It depends on the state , but to my knowledge most states allow at least two weeks from the purchase of a new car for you to call your agent or carrier and update your vehicle information . During those two weeks the new vehicle -LRB- or newly purchased used vehicle -RRB- is typically considered covered . However , always update your vehicles with your agent or carrier asap !
The first penalty is that you more than likely would not be able to register your car for use on public roads . Most States require car insurance in order to do that . If you had car insurance but let it lapse , or cancel it , the Insurance Company in many states like Connecticut , will notify the Department of Motor Vechicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- . They will contact you and require you to show proof of coverage . If you can not , they will suspend your registration andit will be illigal to drive your car -LRB- s -RRB- . If you do drive and are stopped by a police officer , along with the charge for which you have been stopped , you will also be found to be driving an unregistered and uninsured car which will add to the size of your fine . In many cases the car will be towed and impounded and you will have to find another means of transportation back home , for which you may have to pay . You may also be required to appear in court . Once that is behind you , in order to get your car back , you will have to show proof that you have bought insurance again . It will be more expensive now because of the violations and the fact that you have not had continuous coverage . You will also have to pay to have the car releassed from the impound facility . You will have lost considerable time from work for all of this meaning that on top of having to shell out more money , you will have lost pay . Bottom line ... do n't drive without insurance .
You most certainly can get auto insurance without a car . If you needed toborrow , test drive , rent , or lease a vehicle for whatever reason you would purchase what is called a drive other car policy . It covers you for driving the car that you dont own . This coverage would pay claims first in the event of a claim . The insurance that the owner of the car carries on the car would pay secondary .
If you purchased another car just call your agent and have the insurance transferred to the new car . Otherwise if you sold your car and are not planning on driving , then cancel the insurance . The insurance company will return any unused premium . Obviously you can not insure a car that you no longer have . If you are planning on driving you need to talk to your agent about getting liability coverage or in many states you will lose your license for driving without insurance , even though you do not own a car . Liability protects you from law suit in the event of an accident and has very little to do with vehicle ownership .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
Driving without car insurance in not a smart idea . Colorado requires drivers to carry insurance limits of $ 25,000 per per person , $ 50,000 per accident for bodily injury , and $ 15,000 per occurrence of property damage liability . If you get caught driving without insurance , the police can arrest you and impound your car . The court can impose additional fines and requirements , or restrict your ability to drive . Contact a local agent to discuss your auto insurance needs . If you can not afford full coverage , let them know that . It is better to have the state minimum requirements and be able to pay for the coverage , then no coverage at all . Let us know if their is anything we can assist you with !
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
Every state is different , but if you are caught driving your car without insurance in Connecticut , there could be consequences for sure . Presumably you would have been pulled over for something else . So you would be issued a ticket for that AND for driving without insurance . If you are not able to prove coverage to the court or DMV , you would face a serious fine , your registration would be suspended and perhaps your license as well . If you are found to be driving without insurance and have just caused an accident , please keep in mind the following : `` Insurance only provides coverage , it does not limit liability '' .
You can drive a car without insurance on it . It should run just fine . However if you are pulled over by a police officer , or become involved in a car accident you could get into plenty of legal and financial trouble . Driving an uninsured car is against the law . Any vehicle damage , or medical bills caused by the accident may become your sole responsibility . Buy insurance before driving the car .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Most auto dealers will not let you drive the car off of the lot unless you have proof of insurance if there is a loan on the car . It is never a good idea to drive a car without insurance . If you traded a car in , then the coverage on the older car may extend to the new car temporarily , but you need to call your agent as soon as possible and get it changed . Most dealerships have an insurance agent they work with who can get you coverage as well .
No , you do not need to have your own insurance on the car you are driving . However , you DO need to be at least listed as a driver . Just like it 's illegal to drive without a license or permit - it is also illegal to drive a vehicle without insurance ! If you own your vehicle I can provide some free quotes at : www.PaInsuranceMadeEasy.com
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
end question
start question
annuities
What Is An Immediate Annuity ?
There are two types of annuities , immediate and deferred . An immediate annuity as the name suggest provides an immediate income . A deferred annuity has the income deferred until a later date . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is an excellent question ! Most annuities are designed to wait a period of time before they `` annuitize '' , or begin to pay out -LRB- `` deferred '' annuities -RRB- . An immediate annuity has no wait , but begins to pay out very quickly . It is a way to take a large sum of money and create a steady income stream from it.I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
That is a great question ! There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . An immediate annuity is one that is made with a single lump sum deposit , and the annuity begins paying out no later than a year from the contract date . A deferred annuity is a contract that may allow periodic payments , or a single payment to fund it ; and the payments do not start for a specified number of years later . It will have a number of fees and penalties attached to the early withdrawal of the funds . A deferred annuity will generally provide a much larger return on your investment because of the time between funding and annuitization , something not provided in the immediate annuity . An immediate annuity would be something to consider if you received a settlement , or large inheritance , and needed to supplement your income , and lower your tax liability . A deferred annuity would be suited for creating an income stream for later in life , understanding that once it was funded , the money would become relatively unavailable to you until then . Please be sure to have your agent walk through a good suitability study with you to ensure you get the annuity that best suits your need . Feel free to inbox me , if you have further questions . Thank you for asking !
When you say retirement annuity , I guess you are referring to an annuity that pays an income monthly ? With that being said , the annuity that you are referring to is called an immediate annuity . Immediate annuities come in many variations of length of income streams . Typically an annuity to fund retirement would be a life only with survivor benefits . Basically this annuity will pay a monthly income for as long as a Annuitant is alive and then either 100 % or as low as 50 % to a survivor , normally a spouse for the rest of their life . There are many different types of annuities however . One annuity in particular is an Indexed annuity with an income rider . This would be an alternative to the immediate annuity .
Good question ! Creditor protection is an important concern , especially for the self-employed . There are basically two types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Both are considered insurance products and as such can offer creditor protection under certain circumstances . Immediate annuities , as the name suggests , provide an immediate income stream in exchange for a lump sum . They are often used to provide a guaranteed income in retirement planning . Deferred annuities are accumulation products that have the option of an annuity at some point in the future . In Canada for example , they can be Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- , that are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GIC -RRB- or Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- that are similar to mutual funds . With both types of annuities , in order to offer creditor protection , you would need to have been solvent when you put the money into the contracts . In other words , you would not have been trying to attempt fraud . If the above condition is met , the income flow from immediate annuities is afforded creditor protection . Deferred annuities , like insurance policies , receive creditor protection based on the beneficiary designation . Eligible beneficiaries include those in the `` protected class '' : spouse , parents , children and grandchildren . In addition , irrevocable beneficiaries also qualify . Please check with a lawyer for your individual situation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
The challenge to answering the question `` Will annuities increase ? '' is that the answer depends on the context of the question . I will provide an answer for different situations and if you would like further clarification you can contact me . In Canada , there are basically two type of annuities , immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities provide an income in exchange for a lump sum . With a deferred annuity , the income is in the future , Deferred annuities are often used as an accumulation or investment vehicle . When the investment options are guaranteed , it is similar to a guaranteed investment certificate , GIC , and could increase through interest growth . In Canada , variable deferred annuities are often referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . These are similar to mutual funds and their value can increase or decrease depending on the fund -LRB- s -RRB- performance . Since they are issued by insurance companies , seg funds do offer minimum death and maturity guarantees , typically 75 % or 100 % . Some companies also offer resets or the locking in of gains , the full details of which are outlined in the plan 's information folder . One major factor in determining the income provided from immediate guaranteed annuities is long term interest rates . If rates increase , the amount of income provided will also increase . The income from an immediate annuity can also increase after issue depending on the terms of the contact . An indexed annuity for example can provide for an increase in income each year . Another option would have part of the income dependent on the performance of a fund or pool of funds , where the income would increase or decrease depending on the funds ' performance . This is a basic overview of a potentially complex subject . Do not take any action without consulting a licensed professional . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Annuities can be immediate or deferred , both have a place in retirement and financial planning . With an immediate annuity , you exchange a lump sum for an immediate income . Unit Linked Annuities are sometimes called variable annuities . With this type of annuity the income you receive varies totally or partially based on the performance of funds you have selected . A Deferred annuities can be thought of as an accumulation vehicle . The value of Unit linked annuities or variable annuities -LRB- called segregated funds in Canada -RRB- fluctuate based on the performance of the funds selected . If you have any further questions , please do n ot hesitate to contact me .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
The best annuities are the ones you own . If you are choosing which annuity to buy , you will find that there is a wide range of options available . There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . If you have funds that you are prepared to invest now in exchange for an income flow that starts immediately , then you want an immediate annuity , otherwise you want a deferred annuity . The range of annuities ranges from guaranteed to speculative . Some require specific licenses . The investment should be paired with your risk tolerance . The best annuity is one that does not cause you stress and meets your financial objectives .
There is no accumulation period for immediate annuities . After you purchase the SPIA -LRB- Single Premium Immediate Annuity -RRB- with a single lump sum amount , you are able to begin receiving payments from the annuity almost immediately . Typically , you will receive your first payment one month after the immediate annuity is procured .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
Before defining Variable Annuities , it is important to have an understanding about annuities in general . Immediate guaranteed annuity - in exchange for a lump sum the insurance company will pay a guaranteed amount for the rest of your life , -LRB- with or without a minimum payout guaranteed -RRB- or for a specified term or duration . Easy way to understand it is like a mortgage in reverse - you give lump sum and get income in return . Immediate variable annuity - in exchange for a lump sum you receive an income as above , all or part of the income amount depends on the performance of a pool of funds or an index chosen by you . Deferred annuity - you deposit fund with an insurance company and the funds are invested and you have guaranteed annuity amount or an option to receive at maturity -LRB- depending on what you had chosen -RRB- . Variable deferred annuity - In Canada , these are typically called segregated funds and are similar to mutual funds , but since they are issued by insurance companies , they have guarantees at maturity and death.The amount of the investment will vary depending on the performance of the funds chosen and can be converted into a immediate annuity at maturity . This is a very simple overview of a potentially complex subject and you should not take any action before discussing with a licensed professional . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . .
There are two basic types of annuities : immediate and deferred . With an immediate annuity , you exchange a lump sum for an immediate income . This is often used as retirement income . All , or part of , the income received from a unit linked annuity -LRB- variable annuity -RRB- fluctuates based on the performance of the fund or funds you have selected . A deferred annuity is an accumulation plan that provides the option of an income annuity in the future . In Canada unit linked or variable annuities are called segregated funds or seg funds . They are similar to mutual funds and their value will increase or decrease based on performance . Since they are issued by insurance companies , they do offer maturity and death benefit guarantees . Some offer the resets or the locking in of maturity guarantee to protect investment gains . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
In short , it depends on the size of the annuity -LRB- how much you want to put it in -RRB- . If you want to buy an immediate annuity , you 're paying a sum of money to the insurance company in one payment and you 're done - you start receiving annuity payments immediately . If you want to buy a deferred annuity , you are paying premiums to the carrier throughout a given number of periods - you start receiving annuity payments at a future point in time . The advantage being that the monies put into the annuity grow tax-deferred . What you get out of the annuity will vary a lot as well because each carrier that offers annuities will offer different interest rates so one company may offer a large payout to you than another even though you 're putting in the same amount of money either way . This is where an independent annuity broker comes in handy because they can work with you on a personal level , compare options from multiple carriers to see which will offer you the best payout , and get your annuity set up - plus , brokers do not charge fees for their services so you can only help yourself . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
annuities
Who Assumes The Risk In A Variable Annuity ?
In Canada , variable annuities are often referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . They are similar to mutual funds , but since they are issued by insurance companies that have certain maturity and death benefits guarantees . Some even include locking in or resetting of the guarantees to `` lock in '' market gain . The insurance company does provide some guarantees , however , any amount that is allocated to a segregated fund is invested at the risk of the policy owner and may increase or decrease in value . A description of the key features of the segregated fund policy issued by the insurance company is contained in the information folder . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
It all depends on your risk tolerance and financial needs . Fixed annuities are well suited for a conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns . Indexed Annuities are well suited for a conservative to semi-conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns with the opportunity for a higher return than a fixed annuity . Variable Annuities are well suited for an investor who does not mind taking on the risk of loss . A person should carefully asses their risk tolerance and realistically how much loss they are willing to withstand before investing in a Variable Annuity . Annuities can be a great idea depending on your retirement savings needs .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
Products , in and of themselves , dont present a good value or a bad value . Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
Variable annuities are only good for people with a high level of risk tolerance . Variable annuities can lose money , as well as , gain money . Hence , the term variable . When looking at variable annuities make sure you understand the risks involved . There are some great agents that can help you decide if these investments are the best fit for your tolerance and situation . There are other annuities that do not pay as much interest but are safer . For example , some annuities offer `` floors '' . Every annuity has some pros and cons so just make sure you understand the contract .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Variable annuities are personal property . Personal property has an owner . An owner can pass property at death in differing ways . There may be state specific issues , so generalizations are used . Strictly by the question posed : Assuming that this is a non-qualified annuity with no generational stretch planning tactics , the variable annuity will , in most states , bypass probate and pass directly to the primary beneficiary of the policy . If thats a spouse , more than likely , no taxable event will occur -LRB- assuming theres a gain -RRB- , but someone else , including children , will more than likely pay ordinary income tax on any gain .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities are classified as a security . Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities have separate sub accounts using market equities and bond investments that can lose money and incur policy expenses . A personal financial profile needs to be created with a risk tolerance assessment before moving forward with the purchase of a non-qualified or qualified tax deferred variable annuities or the allocation of the separate sub accounts . Variable annuity policy expense loads can be a concern as policy expenses are paid out of deposits made into the annuity regardless of positive or negative performance . Variable annuities , like all annuities , are designed ultimately for generating income . You may want to consider purchasing an income rider that may offer guaranteed lifetime income .
That is a great question ! Annuities can be a great part of a retirement plan , but they are n't suited for everyone , because of the type of investment that they are . Before an agent can legally sell you an annuity , they have to do a `` suitability analysis '' . In this analysis , we sit down and discuss your current financial status , your cash flow issues , and your tolerance for risk , among other things . If you are financially suited for the purchase of an annuity , it is often the risk tolerance that determines which type of annuity is best for you . If you have a very low tolerance , then a variable annuity would not be a suitable annuity for you , while a fixed annuity probably would be . If you had a moderate risk tolerance , but an aversion to losing money , the variable annuity again might not be suitable for you , but an indexed one might be . If you have a high risk tolerance , and like to play the market , and keep involved in the transactions , then this may be the annuity for you . I hope that answers your question , please feel free to drop me a line if you 'd like more details , ok ? Thanks for asking !
A non-qualified , tax deferred fixed rate annuity is only as guaranteed as the contract provisions outline and is only as good as the annuity insurance company that issued the contract . That being said , many financial stable annuity insurance companies offer a non-qualified tax deferred fixed rate annuities , generally at 5 , 7 and 10 year periods . A non-qualified , tax deferred variable annuity is separate sub accounts which use equity and bond instruments in variable annuities . Because these accounts are market driven you can lose money . Currently the variable annuity feature of the income rider is attractive for investors with an established risk tolerance . There are many competitive variable annuity contracts available . ;
Product suitability determined by a personal financial profile that establishes risk tolerance and tax deferral as a priority , must first be developed . A non-qualified variable annuity not invested in the guaranteed interest account has market risk to principle deposited . The allocation of separate sub accounts may have greater or lesser risk determined by the asset mix . The economic goals of the investor must correlate to the variable annuity and its asset allocation mix and the length of holding period needs to match up to the investors economic timeline . A variable annuity is neither good nor bad ; however the recent variable annuity designs may not be as consumer centric as they were before 2007 .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Effect Does Obamacare Have On Medicare ?
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
Obamacare is national mandatory health insurance for all Americans . Presently the health care law does n't address long term care as does Medicaid . Individual long term care insurance is private insurance and at present is not directly effected by Obamacare . It is conceivable that Medicaid could be effected by Obamacare and may have future ramifications for long term care . It 's simply too early to assess the impact .
If it has not already , it eventually will unless there are further delays or changes to the Affordable Care Act . Granted , those who have plans that were in place before the passage of the law on March 23 , 2010 can technically keep these policies in effect . That assumes your insurance carrier does n't phase out such policies and that you make essentially no changes to the policy . You may recall there was quite a national uproar over this issue late in 2013 that prompted President Obama to kind of have to live up to his `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' promise so we have seen more renewal offers of existing pre-Obamacare policies since then in the individual and small group marketplaces . And this does kind of trap these policyholders . ObanaCare compliant policies are generally significantly more expensive than their pre-Obamacare counterparts . So , you can experience some pretty significant rate increases on your old policy in some cases and still be marginally better off financially than moving to an ObamaCare compliant policy . I am certainly seeing this scenario play out in some cases . For ObamaCare to have any vague chance of working financially they really need to pull as many people as possible into their pool . Continuing to allow the existence of non-compliant policies denies them this revenue stream and probably a healthier population that chooses to maintain such policies . So , regardless of the promises of politicians , consumers need to be vigilant if they have an old style policy that they want to keep . The pressure will continue to build to save you people who do n't know better from your `` trash '' policies as the administration referred to them and to move you into the glorious world of ObamaCare .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- a dependent child can be covered on their parent 's health insurance policy until they turn age 26 . After you blow out the candles on your birthday cake when you turn 26 you have 60-days to obtain your own health insurance coverage . If you fail to do so within that 60-day period then you will be unable to enroll in ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance until the next open enrollment period for an effective date of the first of the year . In 2014 the open enrollment period begins on November 15th and the earliest date your coverage could go into effect would be on January 1 , 2015 . If you have missed your 60-day enrollment window then you could possibly take out a Short Term Major Medical policy to cover you until you can enroll in ObamaCare compliant coverage . Please be aware that Short Term Major Medical policies do not cover pre-existing conditions , some can decline you for coverage entirely , and they do not meet the individual mandate requirements of ObamaCare for the purposes of avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
When Obamcare was passed in March of 2010 , one of the key objectives that had to be met from a political standpoint was showing that its costs over the coming 10 years would be under $ 1 trillion dollars . This somewhat arbitrary number was picked to say that Obamacare would cost less than what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , this may have made for good political theatre but what it really had to so with healthcare and health insurance in practical terms always kind of eluded me . One of the ways that the democrat party made the numbers work -LRB- and I 'm just stating historical facts here , no Republicans ever voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act -RRB- was that they transferred $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over that 10 year period to fund ObamaCare . We will still be spending more on Medicare in the coming decade but the amount of available funding has certainly been sharply deflected downwards at a time when a record number of Americans will be in and entering the Medicare program . So , in this way , ObamaCare has shifted funds that would have otherwise gone towards Medicare to help paint a budget picture that allowed for the passage of the law . Of course , since then government estimates for the projected 10 year cost of Obamacare has gone far above the $ 1 trillion mark but , hey , they got the law passed and they did n't even really have to read it .
What does Obamacare mean ? Are you sure you want to ruin your day ? Sorry ... Just a little joke there . Obamacare is the new `` Affordable Care Act , '' that was designed to lower healthcare costs and health insurance rates . You were supposed to be able to keep your existing policy and save thousands of dollars per year in premiums . That 's what it was supposed to be . It is n't . So what is it ? In 2014 we 'll get a better idea of the effectiveness of the legislation . Americans will have to buy health insurance or pay a tax . Federal tax subsidies will help many consumers pay lower premiums . But many others will face skyrocketing prices . It should be very interesting .
The answer will depend upon whether you are talking about group health insurance or individual health insurance . Employers have a certain degree of flexibility in establishing a waiting period before a new hire can become eligible to enroll in the company 's group plan . Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- now in effect this waiting period should not exceed 90 calendar days from your date of hire . So , this establishes a maximum waiting period under an employer based plan but the employer can choose to have a shorter waiting period . If you are applying for individual health insurance during the open enrollment period or following a change of life status event it will depend upon when you have submitted your enrollment form . If your enrollment form is received on or before the 15th of the month your coverage should go into effect on the first of the next month -LRB- e.g. - February 10 submission would be for a March 1st effective date -RRB- . If your enrollment form is received after the 15th of the month your coverage would become effective on the first of the following month -LRB- e.g. - February 18th submission would be for an April 1st effective date -RRB- .
If the provisions of ObamaCare goes into effect effective 01/01/2014 you can not be denied . Every individual should be able to get coverage and this is one of the provisions of ObamaCare that will certainly survive the meltdown that is sure to come . The insurance companies only cut their own throat when they fail to provide coverage to individuals at a price that reflects their health insurance situation . I think the insurance companies owes it to also consioder if the `` health issues '' are self inflicted or if they were genetic . The hard head that says `` I have a right to smoke '' should also have the right to pay for it .
Despite assertions to the contrary , it is entirely possible that Obamacare -LRB- AKA the ACA -RRB- could be eliminated but Trump wo n't have the power to make that change by himself . Many point to the Supreme Court rulings as legitimacy but they were made on narrow points of law and the power of the purse will have be an effective means of gutting the law -LRB- if that is a course chosen -RRB- . More likely , the plan will be fundamentally altered . As a plan it has reached well past what most Americans consider reasonable and one of the undeniable aspects of Obamacare is the subsidy system which phases out over a period of several years . Once the subsidies die many of those who are receiving subsidized premiums will again find their insurance to be too expensive . Additionally , when the IRS begins assessing people penalties for failing to maintain coverage , attitudes will shift back towards a voluntary insurance programs . Frankly , the most logical outcome with Obamacare is significant changes to structure and subsidies and a relaxation of onerous and overbearing aspects of the law that politicians will have to consider to make it more universally acceptable among health care and the population . Maybe more importantly , some speculate that Obamacare is already in financial trouble but the real test is in seven or eight years when all the back end loading of losses will overwhelm the premiums and result in a political uproar when the actuaries insist on gigantic infusions of tax money to keep social medicine afloat .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
My sick sense of humor almost tempts me to say `` No , real estate agents are specifically excluded from getting health insurance by law '' but I wo n't do that . Yes , you can get health insurance . What you do for a living has no bearing on your eligibility for health insurance , especially now that ObamaCare is in full effect regarding guaranteed issuance of policies . In my experience , most real estate agents are self-employed/1099 contractor status people and not W2 employees of an agency . So , this probably means that you will need to get individual health insurance either through your state 's government health insurance marketplace or outside of it . So , just like you would tell those `` For Sale By Owner '' folks , you need to seek out an experienced health insurance agent who can assist you in obtaining coverage . If you have been without health insurance for more than 60-days and have n't had what is called a `` change of life status event '' -LRB- marriage , divorce , childbirth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- then you are in a time frame where you would be ineligible for enrollment in true major medical insurance until the next annual open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 and the earliest your coverage could go into effect would be for January 1st , 2015 . I hate to be the one to deliver this news but that is how ObamaCare works . Your only coverage option to carry you through until then would be to take out a Short Term Medical insurance plan . There are a variety of short term medical plan options available . However , you need to be aware that short term medical plans do still use limited underwriting questions , can decline a person for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . Please feel free to contact me if you need advice or assistance in this matter .
Does Obamacare effect life insurance ? So far , no . But at some point Obamacare and all that it offers , has to be paid for . There is a serious effort in DC to find tax revenue sources and life insurance and annuities are both being eyed for future tax revenues to support the cost of healthcare . One thing when changes like this happen , and they do happen , what 's in force is usually grandfathered and kept exempt from the action . Usually something like this would apply to future purchases . Just another reason not to `` round to it . ''
Excellent question and one about which there is much confusion these days . As a general rule , most health insurance policies do not cover routine eye exams -LRB- this would be different from an eye exam required to diagnose and/or treat a medical condition like Macular Degeneration -RRB- . Many employers and a growing number of individuals insure their vision care needs through separate Vision Insurance policies that do cover eye exams , lenses , frames , contact lenses , etc. . Where things get more confusing , and sometimes frustrating for the consumer , is in understanding some of the new benefits mandated by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . One of these mandatory benefits is that coverage for pediatric vision and dental be included in health insurance policies sold on or after January 1 , 2014 . So , you may be paying for a vision benefit that only your children can use and if you have no children you are paying for a benefit you , as an adult , can not use . The consumer should not assume that even if their new ObamaCare compliant policy is in place that this will translate into effective coverage for your dependent children . Each insurance carrier has designed their benefit plans differently in regard to the vision & dental requirements . Some make it an upfront benefit similar to vision insurance coverage you may have seen in the past while others require that the major medical plan 's deductible be met before such services would be reimbursed . So , if you have a Bronze plan with a $ 6000 deductible you technically have some vision coverage for dependent children but no effective coverage until you have met the $ 6000 deductible first . Buyer beware is my advice and the consumer should carefully research this benefit area in the various health insurance options you might be considering . This is another example of where an experienced and knowledgeable health insurance broker can be invaluable in helping you select the health insurance plan best suited to your needs and budget .
At this point in time the ACA -LRB- obamacare -RRB- does not involve life insurance . That is not to say that at some point in the future life insurance may be tapped for taxes on the inside buildup of cash values to help pay for the ACA which is turning out to be an extremely expensive undertaking . The cash values of life insurance have always had tax favored treatment during the build up phase . So far , those dollars have escaped those in government who seek revenues to fund their projects . So it is possible that in the future Obamacare will effect life insurance , but more as a revenue source tax wise .
NO ! NO ! NO ! Am I clear here ? If someone looked you in the eye and sold you this company 's coverage as true major medical insurance then you have been scammed . If you went to a web site and went `` Oh , cheap health insurance '' and then purchased it without reading the details you were still kind of scammed but you are also at some fault for not doing your homework . This is what is referred to as a limited benefit health plan . It probably does technically have some insurance components to it that are what are called `` indemnity plans '' which pay a fixed amount for a day in the hospital or for a visit to the doctor or towards other health services . These plans do not meet the legal requirements under ObamaCare to be defined as major medical insurance and to avoid the individual mandate tax penalty . In fact , they did n't meet the legal criteria to be called major medical plans before ObamaCare went into effect . Such plans were often marketed to businesses with lots of low income employees as a `` better than nothing '' alternative to more expensive group major medical plans . Sometimes they are also marketed to vulnerable individuals who do n't understand health insurance and that sounds like the case here . If your son is on a very tight budget then he will either qualify for very substantial premium subsidies in the government health insurance marketplace or for Medicaid . In either case he would have better , more affordable coverage through these options than what this outfit is selling . Also , please do my profession a favor and if an insurance agent has tried to sell you this coverage and told you it was major medical coverage please report him or her to your state 's insurance department for investigation .
Let us begin by being clear on what ObamaCare is not . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- a.k.a. - ObamaCare -RRB- does not in itself provide insurance to anyone . ObamaCare is a bureaucratic & administrative structure that imposes requirements on the private health insurance system and , where accepted by state governments , expands the eligibility range for qualifying for Medicaid . It is funded through government appropriations channeled through several departments of the government -LRB- Health & Human Services , IRS , DOL , etc. -RRB- , a wide range of new taxes -LRB- tanning salons , medical devices , taxes on Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans , taxes on health insurance companies , increased Medicare Part A tax on high income wage earners are few examples -RRB- , changes to existing tax breaks -LRB- reducing the FSA deduction from $ 3500/yr to $ 2500/yr and eliminating the eligibility of over the counter drugs from coverage under FSA plans -RRB- , a $ 63 per employee per year fee assessed on group health insurance plans , the eventual employer mandate and individual mandate tax penalties for non-compliance , reductions in the amount of out of pocket medical expenses you can deduct from your personal income taxes -LRB- threshold increased from 7.5 % to 10 % of income to qualify for a deduction -RRB- , fees -LRB- insurance companies have to pay for the privilege of selling their products in the government marketplaces -RRB- , and $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over the next decade was shifted over to help fund Obamacare . This is not a total listing but hits many of the essential high points of where the money is supposed to be coming from .
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Gerber Life Insurance A Good Deal ?
I find Gerber 's prices to be a good deal for children . Gerber also has a guaranteed issue policy that can come in handy for those who do not qualify for other policies . To compare rates of any of the Gerber plans or policies with other life insurance companies , you can go to a website that offers a variety of companies and input your state , date of birth , height , weight , tobacco status , and some medical information . While price is n't everything , it is nice to compare before making a decision .
It depends on what you call a good deal . If you are looking at starting a life insurance policy on your child to protect them incase of premature death or to guarantee options to buy more life insurance in the future , then Gerber is a nice policy . But with that being said I have to say that I strongly disagree with their latest run of TV commercials that promote buying their life insurance policy as a way to fund your child college . Again in my opinion when you look at the premium that you are paying , how long it will be paid and the cash value that is available when your child is ready to go to college , that statement borders on the line of lying . Funding college no , funding some college books is more like it . Everything really comes down to what are you buying the insurance policy for .
I find Gerber 's prices to be a good deal for children . Gerber also has a guaranteed issue policy that can come in handy for those who do not qualify for other policies . To compare rates of any of the Gerber plans or policies with other life insurance companies , you can go to a website that offers a variety of companies and input your state , date of birth , height , weight , tobacco status , and some medical information . While price is n't everything , it is nice to compare before making a decision .
Gerber Life Insurance Company carries a number of different types of life insurance plans . Therefore , the cost will vary depending on the type of policy , as well as the age of the applicant . You can go to the Gerber Life website to get a quote for the plan that you choose . Keep in mind that there are other No Exam life insurance policies that can be compared to Gerber 's prices to be sure that you are getting the best deal .
Gerber life insurance is life insurance provided by Gerber Life Insurance Company . A company headquartered in White Plains , NY and established in 1967 . It is a financially separate entity from the Gerber Products Company , with the same mission - `` help parents raise happy , healthy children '' . Gerber life insurance offers both term life insurance and whole life insurance . They even have signature products that include term or whole life . The Gerber Life Insurance Company currently has a single A rating from A.M. Best , which is consider ` Excellent ' . A.M. Best provides impartial reporting by rating insurance company management , integrity , and financial stability .
Gerber Life Insurance comes in the basic types of Term and Permanent , which are the types of life insurance that are offered by most life insurance companies . In that respect , getting Gerber Life Insurance , or any life insurance , is usually a good idea . To determine whether Gerber 's life insurance is best for you , compare prices and features with similar policies . If purchasing Whole Life , it is a good idea to talk to an agent so that you understand all the features and variables of each policy .
It depends on what you call a good deal . If you are looking at starting a life insurance policy on your child to protect them incase of premature death or to guarantee options to buy more life insurance in the future , then Gerber is a nice policy . But with that being said I have to say that I strongly disagree with their latest run of TV commercials that promote buying their life insurance policy as a way to fund your child college . Again in my opinion when you look at the premium that you are paying , how long it will be paid and the cash value that is available when your child is ready to go to college , that statement borders on the line of lying . Funding college no , funding some college books is more like it . Everything really comes down to what are you buying the insurance policy for .
Gerber Life Insurance Company is a competitive company when it comes to insuring children . And in fact , for older adults who have medical issues preventing them from getting Life Insurance elsewhere , Gerber is one of the options to consider . Gerber has been around for a long time providing insurance for children . Gerber is one of the many companies we represent as well . Hope this answers your question .
You can cancel your Gerber life insurance policy by contacting Gerber Life Insurance Company 's customer service center . They can be reached by phone at their toll free phone number of 1-800-704-2180 . Or you can mail them at Gerber Life Insurance Co , 445 State St , Michigan , 49412 to request the cancellation .
We carry Gerber , and find that it is very competitive for children and for older adults who are unable to qualify for other policies . Their guaranteed issue life insurance is especially reasonable for that type of coverage if you choose to pay it monthly by automatic withdrawal from your checking account . As with other guaranteed issue policies , there is a graded period where the policy only pays for accidental death , then after two years it will pay the full death benefit for death by any reason . If death occurs in the first two years , it pays back all premiums plus 10 % , which is a better sure return than you can get anywhere else . Where the guaranteed issue Gerber policy might not be worth it is if the insured person lives so long that the policy pays less than the premiums paid in . However , this type of policy is usually purchased by those for whom life expectancy may be shortened due to illness or weight . In my opinion , the risk of not having any coverage would be worse than the choice to purchase a Gerber policy and not need it until many years later .
Your question can mean many things . Gerber has an `` A '' rating by A.M.Best , the company most recognized by the life insurance industry . Gerber 's products are generally at the lower end of need for most people as they mainly sell final expense type products . Premiums are generally competitive , and a good independent agent will guide you to the best value for your needs .
Gerber Whole Life Insurance , per their website , if offered to persons age 18-65 and in face amounts of $ 25,000 to $ 150,000 . Gerber also uses Whole Life in their Grow-Up Plan . Whole Life insurance is permanent insurance that has cash value . To determine the best Whole Life insurance for you , contact an agent that offers a variety of Whole Life policies to compare features and projected cash values .
For all but their Accident Protection Plan , Gerber Life Insurance covers death by any reason . Life insurance excludes death by suicide during the first two years , and if there is misrepresentation on the application and death occurs during the first two years , there is a chance the policy may not pay the death benefit . Aside from those situations , Gerber life insurance covers death due to natural and accidental causes , as does all traditional life insurance .
Gerber has Whole Life insurance policies for babies to senior ciitizens . Most are under $ 100,000 . Some -LRB- for persons over age 50 -RRB- are guaranteed issued policies . You can get a quote directly from the Gerber website or contact an agency like ours for a quote for guaranteed issue life insurance .
Gerber life insurance company began in 1967 and is rated A -LRB- excellent -RRB- rating by A.M.Best , a third party watchdog agency . Gerber has 40 million in force with 3 million customers and 2 billion in assets under management . It is a small niche carrier in the life insurance market place .
Gerber Life is a `` legitimate '' life insurance company in that it is domiciled in the state of NY and is located at 1311 Mamaroneck Ave. , White Plains , NY , 10605 , 914272-4000 , and is licensed to do business in all 50 states and Canada . They list six product groups on their website , WEBSITELINK , includingthe onlyendowment life policy that is also an adult life insurance policy . It 's called the Gerber Life College Plan and has been their flagship policy for a long time . They are definitely a niche carrier , targeting the parent and grandparent market . Their contracts have many guaranteed features that appeal to those that do n't want to take any chances that their insurance might lapse or diminish in value over time . I have worked with their service teams on a few occasions and they are knowledgeable and very customer-oriented . The have been rated `` A '' , AM Best 's third-highest financial rating , and `` A - '' by Weiss , which is their 3rd best rating as well . Both of those ratings are within the `` Excellent '' range of both rating services . That gives them a Comdex of `` 80 '' , which means that 80 % of all financially-rated carriers are ranked below them . If by `` legitimate '' you are referring to their contracts being of real value , or if can you trust a life insurance company that is also a baby food company , you may want to do more research . From and industry point of view , they are legitimate .
Gerber Life Insurance is an A rated carrier that sells both term and permanent coverage . The Gerber name is well know for baby food and because of that , they have a name in the marketplace that suggests family , safety , etc. . Other than that they are generally involved in the lower tiers of life insurance coverage , and do much of their business through the mail . They also offer several plans that do not require an exam .
Gerber Life is one of the many insurance companies that offers life insurance benefits - they were rated `` A '' by A.M. Best . They feature a great guaranteed-issue whole life insurance program -LRB- GIWL -RRB- for people between ages 50-80 - there are no health questions and no exam required for the program . The program features a `` graded '' death benefit - in short , a two-year waiting period before the program will pay a death benefit -LRB- unless death occurs under accidental means in the first 2 years , in which the policy will pay the full benefit -RRB- . That 's just an overview of one product that they offer . Gerber offers a wide range of products to fit various needs for individuals .
If there is any cash value in your Gerber life insurance policy , and if you own the policy and are entitled to receive the cash value , then you should be able to cash in your Gerber life insurance policy . Permanent life insurance that has cash value can be allowed to go to maturity , or it can be cashed in before that time . Call Gerber to discuss your options .
Yes , Gerber Life Insurance works . Gerber carries several types of policies , and each one has its own unique features . So be sure you are comparing `` apples to apples '' when you are comparing Gerber policies to the policies offered by other companies . E.g. Do n't compare Whole Life to Term Life , check to see how long the rates are guaranteed to remain level , etc. .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Garage ?
Renter 's Insurance wo n't cover a garage structure , but it should cover personal property in a garage . If you own a garage you will likely need to buy a seperate policy for the building as Renter 's Insurance does n't include any coverage for structures . Hope that Help ! Send me a message if you have more questions .
Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and personal liability . It will not cover physical damage to a garage because you have no insurable interest -LRB- you do not own the garage -RRB- . If you had personal property inside the garage and it was damaged or stolen from a covered peril you could make a claim . I 'd suggest you reach out to your local independent insurance agent to discuss what your policy covers . Hope this answer helps .
Renter 's Insurance wo n't cover a garage structure , but it should cover personal property in a garage . If you own a garage you will likely need to buy a seperate policy for the building as Renter 's Insurance does n't include any coverage for structures . Hope that Help ! Send me a message if you have more questions .
Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and personal liability . It will not cover physical damage to a garage because you have no insurable interest -LRB- you do not own the garage -RRB- . If you had personal property inside the garage and it was damaged or stolen from a covered peril you could make a claim . I 'd suggest you reach out to your local independent insurance agent to discuss what your policy covers . Hope this answer helps .
Renters insurance covers any property that you own . If the items are in your garage then they would be covered for any peril covered under your policy . Do not store valuable items in your garage . It is usually much easier to break into a garage than a home .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover your auto while in the garage . Homeowners insurance covers the home and not autos . Only your auto insurance policy can protect your auto while in the garage . If you have an auto you do not drive and just store in your garage I would recommend purchasing comprehensive coverage only on your auto .
If the residence you are renting includes a garage , your personal property stored in the garage would be covered if damaged by one of the covered perils . If the property is stored in a friends garage it would be covered to a specified percentage of your personal property limit . Review your policy to determine that percentage -LRB- usually 10 % -RRB-
A renters policy does not cover structures . It is designed to cover personal property located inside a residence . To the extent that the garage is a part of the house , or is located on the property and contains your personal property , those personal property items should be covered . Please discuss this with your agent when the policy is being written .
If you mean does yourhomeownersinsurance cover garage doors for a named peril then yes . Named perils would be fire , or collision -LRB- car running into it -RRB- to name the top two . If you refer to the Garage door malfunctioning in some capacity then the answer would be no . Mechanical breakdown is not a peril of a homeowners insurancepolicy Some insurance carriers are just now starting to offermechanicalbreakdowncoverage ` sfor an extra premium on your home insurance policy . Discuss with your local agent to see if this is an option available to you .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Usually , yes . Renters Insurance provides coverage for your personal belongings whether they are located in your home or outside of it . So for example if you have a folding picnic table stored in the detached garage located at the property you are renting and it is stolen , you should have coverage subject to your deductible . If on the other hand you are a landscaper and you do not have business property coverage to protect your tools and equipment and someone walks off with your weed whacker , that is business property and the loss probably will not be covered by your Renter 's Insurance .
Renters insurance covers your belongings whether they are in your garage or in your apartment or wherever they are as long as the loss is covered under the policy subject to your deductible . It has to be a covered peil such as fire , theft , vandalism , lightening , wind or other perils specified in your policy .
If your boat is parked in the garage or on your property and it is damaged due to a covered peril then there may be coverage . For example a Fire in the garage destroys your boat . But as a rule you should carry separate Boat insurance to protect your boat and also to protect yourself for liability in the event of a boat accident .
A garage door is part of the dwelling so this means the garage door is covered by the same perils of the policy as the rest of the home minus your deductible . If it 's attached to the home is part of the home . If it falls free then it 's personal property and not dwelling .
If you live in a particular state and register and garage your vehicles in that state you can not purchase out of state insurance for those vehicles . If you live in a particular state but register and garage a vehicle in another state then yes you may purchase the insurance for the vehicle in the state the vehicle resides in .
That is a great question ! Generally , your auto insurance company will have a contract or agreement with a local garage , mechanic , and body shop . They will refer you to them to have your work done . By doing this , they have an agreement with the garages to keep costs under control . Should you choose to use a different mechanic , you are certainly welcome to , but my experience has been that the insurance company is much more difficult to work with . Thanks for asking !
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
It depends on a few different things . First , the type of vehicle will affect the policy premium . For example , a 2005 Toyota Corolla would typically have a lower premium than a 2005 Cadillac Escalade due to the cost difference in the vehicle and the cost difference in the repairs of the vehicle.Second , the driving record of the insured will affect the policy premium . For example , someone with one speeding ticket and an at fault accident will have a higher policy premium than someone with no speeding tickets or accidents . Thisis due to the fact that the insurance companieswill see that person witha ticket and accident as a greater risk to insure than the other person with a clean driving record . Third , the garaged location -LRB- home -RRB- of the vehicle will affect the policy premium . If you are garaging your vehicle in an area with a high rate of auto theft or vandalism the policy premium will be higher than in an area with a low rate of auto theft or vandalism . Again , this goes back to a greater risk for the insurance company . There are many more rating factors that the insurance companies use and they differ from state to state . Here in Arizona , for example , they will look at your credit score , occupation , and highest level of education in order to provide you with a price on coverage .
It should . There are typically exclusions or limitations to certain items , so always check with your agent -LRB- if you 're luckyenoughto have one -RRB- . You mustprovethe loss and the amount and you cannotreceivemore than the policy limits or the per item limits . Property coverage on your renters insurance policy will also cover items in a garage or storage unit or while traveling .
If the garage is part of the premise that you rent , you may coverage through your renters policy . Your personal property is covered up to a dollar amount specified within the policies limits . Please read your policy completely to understand what coverage is provided and exclutions that there may be .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Pregnant Women Get Life Insurance ?
Most insurance underwriters will not consider pregnancy as an underwriting issue so long as the insured does not have other health issues that require medication . Under normal circumstances a healthy pregnant woman should not have any difficulty getting health insurance . If other health issues arise then they may rated higher .
The life insurance industry seems to have no underwriting standard for pregnant women . But a rule of thumb is that most will underwrite a woman during the first two trimesters of pregnancy . General underwriting concerns look for gestational diabetes and high blood pressure , which can generate a rating or postponement .
Yes , if your health is excellent , you can get the best health rating even into the second trimester . There are No Exam policies that are reasonably priced , for which it does not matter if you are pregnant . You can get that quickly , then apply for a medically underwritten policy after your baby is born . You can even add a child rider for your baby , if you wish , that will ensure he or she is able to get reasonably priced life insurance for the rest of his or her life .
This is a very common question and the answer is that it depends on the carrier and its definition of total disability . Normal pregnancy is not considered a disability by some carriers . In fact , it is clearly excluded from coverage in the contract . For others , as long as it falls into their definition of what constitutes a total disability , they will replace income after the elimination period is satisfied . The definition of disability is key . A typical definitionmight be something like `` the inability to perform the usual and customary duties of the occupation -LRB- job -RRB- in which the insured is working at the beginning of a disabling event ... '' A less favorable definition would add the words , `` and is unable to work in any other occupation . '' Since many women are able to performthe primary duties of their occupation during the first two trimesters of a normal pregnancy , some carriers do not automatically consider a leave for pregnancy a trigger point to replace income . And , if they do , 90 days is a typical elimination period - a kind of `` time deductible '' before one qualifies for benefits - most women would probably not satisfy the elimination period before the baby was born anyway . If there were complications resulting from pregnancy , then that 's a whole different situation , and if they started to occur early enough in the pregnancy and did qualify under the definition of disability , the elimination period would theoretically start sooner and benefits might be paid out before birth . If you are beginning a new job and think you might become pregnant or intend to become pregnant during the time you are employed with that company , be sure to ask Human Resources if the company provides disability insurance as a group benefit and if the coverage includes normal pregnancy .
Yes you can get health insurance when pregnant , but there are limitations . There are three places to turn . You can enroll in a group health plan through your employer . HIPPA prevents group plans from excluding pregnancy as a pre-existing condition even if you had no prior coverage . You would enroll during your open enrollment . You can opt into an Affordable Care Act plan in your state marketplace during open enrollment . The policy would take effect on January 1 . Any pregnancy related medical expenses would be immediately covered . Medicaid provides immediate coverage for pregnant women who meet income guidelines . There are no open enrollment limitations for Medicaid .
Women who are currently pregnant can not qualify for individual major medical coverage . Likewise , their spouse -LRB- or expectant father -RRB- can not qualify for individual major medical coverage . An exception is women who qualify for an employer group health insurance plan . Group health insurance plans are not allowed to consider pregnancy a pre-existing condition .
My experience has been that it is possible to get life insurance during the first trimester , but that insurance agencies are reluctant to take an application for a woman in her second and third trimesters of pregnancy , in case of complications . But I am sure there are some companies that will cover women who are up to 6 months pregnant with a medically underwritten policy , especially if they have had previous event free pregnancies and have no pre-existing conditions . For those who are in the third trimester of pregnancy , there are No Exam policies you can get .
The life insurance industry seems to have no underwriting standard for pregnant women . But a rule of thumb is that most will underwrite a woman during the first two trimesters of pregnancy . General underwriting concerns look for gestational diabetes and high blood pressure , which can generate a rating or postponement .
Historically pregnant women could not obtain health insurance when individual health insurance was medically underwritten . Although Obamacare , as it is commonly known as , has many issues and problems , individuals can now obtain guarantee issue health insurance without any issues about pregnancy or pre-existing conditions . During open enrollment which begins again in November 2014 for January 2015 effective dates everyone that wants to apply for health insurance will be approved . If you have a qualifying life event under the IRS code you will be able to purchase health insurance within 60 days of the qualifying event .
This question is usually asked about Medicaid in regards to pregnancy . However , if the question is addressed for Medicare , the answer appears to be the same whether over age 65 and the ultrasounds are used for testing for health conditions , or for a pregnant women who are on Medicare due to being disabled . The criteria is simply that the ultrasounds must be medically necessary and performed by a provider that participates in Medicare .
The cost of having a baby without health insurance could be as low as five thousand dollars if a mid wife and birthing center are used , and millions of dollars if your baby needs specialized care in a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit . The Affordable Care Act provides benefits for maternity and newborn care , plus hospitalization . Women can purchase a policy while pregnant that covers her preexisting pregnancy with no waiting period , provided she enrolls during the open enrollment period . The open enrollment period for 2014 ends on March 31 . The premiums paid for a policy would be much smaller than funding the costs of having a baby yourself .
If you do not have health insurance , I suggest you attempt to negotiate with your doctor early during your pregnancy . You will find many doctors are actually willing to charge less for patients that self-pay using cash , as it cuts their expenses in not having to invoice and follow up with an insurance company to receive their payment . You may also want to contact your state 's Medicaid office to see if you qualify for Medicaid , which is available at no charge to pregnant women in most states .
Medicaid is a Federal government health insurance program established under Title XIX of the Social Security program in 1965 . It is administered and largely funded by the individual states . It 's original and primary purpose is to provide health insurance to low income persons . Though , as is the case with virtually all government entitlement programs it has been expanded in various ways over the years so now there are provisions for coverage in certain circumstances for pregnant women and even illegal aliens among other provisions . Whether or not your family is eligible for Medicaid will be subject to several different criteria such as your employment , how much annual income you make , and how many dependents you have along with some other requirements .
For all practical purposes the answer should be `` No '' . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- requires coverage for maternity and newborn care to be covered as any other illness under its Minimum Essential Benefits requirements . Also , the Affordable Care Act forbids the application of pre-existing conditions exclusions or waiting periods to health insurance policies . During the last open enrolment period I enrolled a couple of previously uninsured women who were pregnant in the new ObamaCare compliant individual health plans offered in our state and they were covered immediately and had their delivery & other associated expenses covered . These same people would have been declined for coverage due to their pregnancies being defined as pre-existing conditions before January 1 , 2014 .
You may be able to get coverage through Medicaid . There are no open enrollment period restrictions for this program . However there are needs based criteria which are often extended for pregnant women . Each state has very different rules for who qualifies . Contact the Medicaid office in your county to see if you qualify .
This is a rather ambiguous question because I am wondering as compared to whom ? I will assume that you mean as compared to a male of similar race and gender . Briefly , please do not take this answer as being racist or sexist , but premiums are based upon loss ratios , which are the results of actuarial studies based upon region , gender , race , age , and a million other details . Typically , women pay a slightly higher premium just because statistically more women make claims then men . Now this might be because more women are driving -LRB- i.e. more numerous claims -RRB- or because men drive more aggressively -LRB- i.e. causing more accidents -RRB- . Now , with this being said , women can shop around to obtain a cheaper premium . Moreover , women can take defensive driving courses and carry more liability insurance to obtain discounts at a later date . If a woman maximizes her discounts then her premium will be negligibly higher than a male of the same age and race . Sorry for the unfair answer .
Life insurance is cheaper for women because statistics over time have proven women as a group tend to live longer than males as a group . Pricing is lower because `` risk '' is spread out over a longer period of time . In a reverse , women cost more for health insurance -LRB- where it 's allowed -RRB- because they are bigger users of healthcare than men . Maybe the reason women live longer .
Yes , unfortunately , pregnancy is a pre-existing condition for disability insurance if you apply while pregnant . If you applied before becoming pregnant , obviously , then the pregnancy would not be a pre-existing condition . However , some polices may require that you apply several months before you become pregnant in order to qualify .
Can you get disability insurance while pregnant ? Yes , you can . Will they cover the pregnancy and any complications with ? NOPE . Disability policies carry a pre-existing condition clause that allows them to turn down a claim for a condition that occurs prior to the application . So you could get a disability policy while pregnant , but everything connected to the pregnancy would not be covered .
Yes , there are some companies that require medical underwriting that will allow a pregnant woman to apply in her first two trimesters . There are some No Exam companies that will allow a woman to apply while pregnant in any trimester . You must be within the policy 's weight guidelines and not be experiencing complications due to pregnancy in order to obtain a policy while pregnant , unless the policy has very few health questions -LRB- simplified or guaranteed issue -RRB- , in which case those things might not matter .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Happens To My 401K If I Die ?
You company should have on file a beneficiary form from you . The money will be sent to the appropriate beneficiary . If your beneficiary does not survive you the money will revert to your estate and potential probate . Keeping the beneficiary designation current is often overlooked and many people have been shocked when the pension they expected to come to them goes to a former spouse .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
That is a great question ! There are some good reasons for borrowing from your 401k , and some bad ones . The good reasons are that they are typically fairly easy to get , and often at much lower interest rates than a commercial lender would give . And depending upon the structure of your 401k , in some cases , the interest that you pay is to yourself , so there is less loss on the loan itself . The bad reasons are worth considering . The worst is what happens if you are let go , or leave the job before the loan is paid off . In many cases the loan has to be repaid within a short period of time , may have serious tax consequences , and that 's not even considering what the withdrawal of the funds may do to the earnings power of your 401k if it 's not structured correctly . The best thing to do is speak with your plan administrator , or HR person , and find out the details of taking out a loan and what the terms are . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
When you ask which life insurance is best in Illinois there are a lot of thing to consider . First of all why are you buying the policy ? Are you buying it to pay your house off if you die , to pay for a funeral , to leave your family with extra money to help them re-adjust their life after you die or are you buying it as a retirement vehicle to replace your 401K . When you figure outthe why , then we can start to narrow down which company has that type of insurance to meet your needs . My years of experience has taught methat there is no one company that can meet all the individual needs of every person . I always look at the WHY first , then I can educate you on the different companies that could fit your needs . If you need more help feel free to Skype me or call 630-918-1673
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 591/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
That is a great question ! The answer is simple . Anything that you borrow , and must repay , is considered to be debt . In the cases where you borrow from yourself , -LRB- 401K loans , life insurance loans , etc. -RRB- it 's easy to think that it is n't really debt , but consider what happens if you do n't pay it back . If you were to lose your job , your 401k debt becomes immediately due in full . Your life insurance loan , if not repaid , can eventually cause the policy to lapse , and eventually cancel . A good financial rule is if you borrow it , it 's a debt , and needs to be repaid . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! If you can afford to contribute to both your Roth IRA and your 401k , then by all means do so ! What a great way to provide for your retirement . You can contribute $ 5500 per year -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- to your Roth , and $ 17,500 in your 401k . Ideally , you contribute the max to your 401k , especially if your employer matches , and then fund your Roth , to ensure that you have some tax free income to balance the taxed income from the 401k . What a great question ! Thanks for asking !
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
The appropriate answer here is '' anywhere you want to invest your 401k assets . '' I mean who are you ? What are your goals ? What have you been investing your 401k in ? How can any adviser tell you where to invest after retirement without knowing you ? Sorry , but I think this is a dumb question . Usually , people roll 401k assets over into an IRA . Some employers allow you to stay put and keep your current investments .
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Who Can Be On Your Car Insurance ?
Relatives living in the insured 's household and related by blood , marriage , adoption , a ward or foster child . Any other person using the insured auto with the insured 's permission . In Wisconsin this includes an adult member of the household . Other persons or organizations are covered in limited situations -LRB- refer to the policy -RRB- .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
I caution anybody to not just assume anybody can drive your car . Most polices have permissive use , but keep in mind , the owner of the car and his insurance company are responsible if there is a loss as insurance follows the vehicle . Also your limits may be reduced to state minimums meaning if the accident exceeds the coverage amounts , the owner , although they were not in the accident can be held liable since the owner loaned the car out . Another thing to consider , permissive use in most cases does not apply to household members who do not have their own car and insurance . All household members who have access to the vehicle are required to be listed or excluded . There has been a great abuse of this by people who do not want to list children or relatives to avoid potentially higher premiums which have resulted in severe consequences when a claim arises And yet another thing to consider is there are carriers who do not have permissive use on their policy at all . If the carrier is unaware of the individual who is operating the vehicle there is no coverage on the owners policy . Always talk to your agent about how your particular policy works and the potential ramifications of loaning out your vehicle .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
This depends upon your state and your insurance carrier . I will first speak generally then about the Michigan rules . General : anyone who is a family member and living in your home is covered by your auto insurance . Anyone who is borrowing your car with your permission is covered . Those are the major general coverage . Michigan : no-fault insurance goes like this 1 . owner of the car , 2 . driver of the car , 3 . someone in the car , 4 . a household family member who has no-fault . The general trend in Michigan is to find someone with insurance and make a claim against it , to prevent a mini-tort . I hope this helps .
Car insurance is important to have for a number of reasons , the big one being it 's generally required by law ! But if that is n't enough to convince you , here are some other reasons it 's important to have car insurance : 1 -RRB- Car insurance protects YOU . Your bodily injury and property damagelimits determine how much the insurance company will pay if you are sued . So , if you have bodily injury limits of 50/100 , your insurance company will only pay $ 50,000 per person and a total of $ 100,000 per accident . If the amount you are sued for is $ 350,000 , guess who is paying the rest ... 2 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your PASSENGERS . What if you are in an accident , the OTHER driver is at fault , but they do n't have any or enough insurance ? That is when your insurance can help again , IF you have uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage . This coverage is similar to the bodily injury/property damage coverage already discussed , but this coverage is to protect you and your passengers in case you are hit by an uninsured or underinsured motorist . 3 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your CAR -LRB- and your wallet -RRB- . If you have Comprehensive -LRB- or Other than Collision -RRB- and Collision coverage on your car , then your car can be repaired and the repairs will be paid for by the insurance company , minus your deductible . This coverage is generally required ONLY if you have a loan or a lease on the vehicle , but it could be a good idea to sit down with your insurance agent and see if your vehicle should have this coverage .
This is a complicated question and really depends upon the insurance laws of your state . No-Fault States : if you live in a no-fault state then you could potentially leave your car in the street without insurance ONLY IF your car is parked in a legal zone and in a safe manner . What I mean by this is you do not want your parked car to be at risk for any liability in the case of an accident . For example , if you are parked on the street outside your house and it is within a couple of inches of the curb and no where near a fire hydrant , then if someone hits your car they will collect against their own insurance and you will not be liable if they sustain any severe physical injuries . However , if your car is in an illegal parking zone or you parked far from the curb , then the person who struck your auto might have cause for a liability suit against you . As a word of caution , just remember that you can get sued regardless of fault and you will have to defend the case until it is dismissed for lack of liability . This means you will still have to pay for an attorney , so it is better to have insurance . Tort-State : you need insurance because they person who hits your parked car will sue you to reclaim collision damages . Please note this is a very brief answer and there are other possible scenarios in both no-fault states and tort-states that can lead to you being sued for having your parked car in the street . I hope this helps .
Coverage follows the car . Example 1 : If you were given a car -LRB- loaned -RRB- and the car has no insurance , you can buy insurance on the car and your insurance will be primary . Another option , someone helped you to buy a car . For example your credit score is n't good enough to finance , so a friend of yours signed under your loan as a primary payor . You can get insurance under your name and even list your friend on the policy as a loss payee . In this case , we always suggest you get a loan gap coverage : the difference between the car 's actual cash value and the amount still owned on it . Example 2 : The car you are loaned has insurance . You can buy a policy under your name , list the car on that policy and in case of the accident , your policy will become a secondary or excess . Once the limits of the primary car insurance are exhausted , your coverage would kick in and hopefully pay for the rest . I specifically used the word hopefully , because each accident is unique and it 's hard to interpret the coverage without the actual claim scenario . And even with a given claim scenario , sometimes there are 2 possible outcomes of a claim .
If you 're auto insurance is just too expensive for you to afford , there are some things you can do to help ease that burden . You may not like some of my advice , but it 's the right advice . A very large part of your insurance premium is the physical damage to the car itself . Raising deductibles will lower your premiums somewhat . Ask yourself if you really need to cover the physical damage at all . If it 's an older car and you own it outright , this could be an option . Before you do this , however , understand that , if your car is damaged , the insurance company will not pay to fix it . One thing not to do is to lower your bodily injury liability limits . You wo n't save very much and you 'll be putting everything you own at risk , including your income . Here 's the advice you may not like : Perhaps you have too nice a car for your budget . If that 's the case , get a less expensive car . Then , when your finances -LRB- or your driving record -RRB- allow , you can always get a nicer car . Talk to an agent you can trust . They can give you advice on these questions as well as others . It also helps if you check rates on a car before you buy it . Everyone loves getting a new car . You just do n't want an unpleasant surprise when your insurance bill comes .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
Great question , but I am afraid I have to say it depends . Each car on your policy will be rated according to who owns it , uses and how they use it , as well as the specific characteristics of the car itself . If you have only one car on your policy now you will be pleased to learn that most carriers offer a multi-car discount.The theory being you can not be driving both cars at once . Many agents and companies can do `` what if '' scenarios to price your additional car , and even if they do not have that capability , they can help you understand the differences that might exist between different makes and models . I would also suggest you also check the info from the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety as they test the car in crash situations to understand how a specific vehicle type will respond .
The insurance company you currently have your auto insurance with may extend coverage to a rental car . If so you do have the option of waiving the coverage offered by the rental car agency . I recommend you contact your agent to verify if your coverage applies to a rental car since not all polices will extend to rental cars . Also depending on the state you are in there are advantages of purchasing the rental cars insurance . For example if you have a solo car accident the damage will be picked up by the rental car agency and not your own insurance carrier thereby avoiding any potential points that may apply . But again , I strongly suggest you contact your agent if you are not sure that your current insurance carrier will extend coverage to a rental car .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Get Cash Value Of Life Insurance ?
To find out how much cash value is in your life insurance policy , you can order a current illustration from your agent , or directly from the life insurance company from which your policy is issued . If you want to literally get the cash value from your life insurance policy , you can borrow from your policy , or you could surrender your policy . Taking a loan against your policy will keep the death benefit intact , as long as you follow the guidelines . If you surrender your policy , you will get all the available cash value , but you will also lose your death benefit protection . It is always a good idea to cover the options with a qualified agent in taking this step . Even if your original agent is no longer around , you can enlist another agent to explain your options and help you avoid some costly mistakes .
There are a few ways to get your money from whole Life . Of course , you can surrender your policy and get its full cash value , but then you would have no life insurance , so this is not recommended . You can borrow against your policy and later pay it back . Or you could borrow against it , never pay it back , keep the money tax free , but lower your death benefit by that amount . A capable agent can review with you all the options and also the best policies to buy to give you these options . New York Life even provides a way of retiring on a pension , with your life insurance policy . Gary Lane , Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Please Call me . Thank you .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
There are two main types of life insurance . The first is term life insurance which has no cash value . Think of it as renting . The second type of life insurance is cash value life insurance . The most popular go by names like , whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . All of which have cash value that builds with time . If you have one of these types of plans , look for the pages marked `` illustrations '' . You will find a cash value column explaining how much cash is built up in a given year . Most policies allow you to take a `` cash loan '' against them and keep your coverage in force . You may also cash out completely or roll the cash value to another plan . You will find the average policy will not have cash value until coverage has been in force for about 5 years .
There are several reasons . With cash value life insurance such as whole life , you do not have to worry about prmiums going up as you get older and most likely to need the insurance . The cash value can help provide a buffer if your financial situation changes . Every whole life policy as nonforfiture options in the contract . The cash value can help conserve a poliy utilizing thes options . If you can not afford the premiums any longer the cash value can be used to buy a reduced paid up policy according to a schedule in your policy . You can also stop making payments and the policy will continue in-force with the cash value buying extended term insurance until the cash value is used up . You can cash surrender the policy and get some equity . When you deduct the cash value of a policy from the total premiums you pay you will see that in the long run cash value insurance was far less expensive than buing term . You can also take a loan on your cash value that is very interest friendly and will have no repayment schedule , although it is always best to at least pay the interest since the amount of the loan would be deducted from the face amount when you die .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Which life insurance has cash value ? Typically whole life and universal life polices have cash value , although some term policies also have a guaranteed cash value . The cash value is essentially a byproduct of keeping the premium level . You pay more up front , so the build up of cash and its growth reduces the company 's amount at risk . How the cash value is calculated , how much is guaranteed and how much -LRB- if any -RRB- is variable , depends on the design of the policy . This is spelled out in the policy wording . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The cash value is the portion of whole life insurance that has built up so far in your cash account . Think of it like money in the bank . The way whole-life is designed , it has a level premium for the length of the policy or until it is paid off . What 's really happening is as the cash account grows , the actual insured amount reduces by the same amount . You become more and more self-insured each year . If you buy $ 100,000 whole-life policy , in the begining your insured amount is $ 100,000 and your cash value is zero . Many years later your cash value is $ 40,000 and the insured amount is $ 60,000 for a total death benefit of $ 100,000 . Several more years later your cash value is $ 90,000 and the Insured amount is $ 10,000 for a death benefit of $ 100,000 If you live to age that the policy endows -LRB- usually age 95 or 100 on older policies and age 121 on newer ones -RRB- the cash value is $ 100,000 and the insured amount is zero . You are now self insured . You can use the cash value while you are living by taking policy loans which are actually loans against the cash build up in your policy not actually withdrawals from the policy or you can cash surrender the policy and walk away with the cash . If you have a participating policy that pays dividends , you can have additional cash value and death benefit build up from that .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
Universal life insurance can be variable or fixed . They are simply two different types of Universal Life . Here are the basic definitions : Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- is a form of life insurance that can build cash value . The cash value can be invested in separate accounts -LRB- similar to mutual funds -RRB- and the owner of the policy gets to choose which separate accounts are chosen , within the scope of what that particular product offerings are . The word `` variable '' refers to the fact the owner can invest in accounts that vary in value such as stocks and bonds . This variable component results in the cash value in your VUL increasing above or decreasing below what you put in . Universal Life -LRB- UL -RRB- is a form of permanent life insurance where the excess in premium payments are credited to the cash value of the policy . If the cash value is referenced against a stock index such as the S&P 500 , it is called an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . An IUL does not put your money in the market but rather references the performance of that market over a measured period of time -LRB- such as a year -RRB- and credits you with interest if the referenced index has increased . Typically , the cash value of an IUL will not decrease as the result of that market declining - they would simply not credit your cash value account with interest for that particular year .
Whole Life has set premiums that never go up , guaranteed cash values , and will be around when you need it as long as you pay the premiums . It also has what is called non-forfeiture values . If you stop making payments and the policy has cash value you can : 1 . Let the policy go on extended term which will provide the full face amount for a period until the cash value runs out . 2 . Take a reduced paid up policy for whatever the cash value will buy . 3 . Cash the policy in . Universal Life has Flexible Premiums , you can change the amount you put into the plan . Flexible Death Benefit , you can change the death benefit , reducing it or if your health is good increase the benefit without having to purchase a new policy . Universal Life has a guaranteed interest rate , not guaranteed cash value . Since the premiums are flexible the danger is in under funding the policy which will make the policy lapse , even if you are making premium payments . Universal Life is basically term insurance with a cash value side fund combined into one package . If there is not enough cash in the policy side fund to pay for the term insurance the policy lapses . It is important to make sure you are properly funding the Universal Life policy by paying at least the Target Premium . Each year you will receive an annual statement showing the cost of the term insurance and the amount of cash in the policy . Have your agent review this with you at least every two years to make sure it is performing as planned . As you can see , while the Universal Life has some attractive features , Whole Life is a safer more stable product .
All the answers above are valid . Term insurance Never has `` cash value '' , but you may be able to buy a `` Return of Premium '' rider with a Term policy that will return most of the premium paid at the termination of the policy . And that without interest . Universal policies may accumulate some cash value after the first several years , but unless the amount of premium is increased to keep pace with the increasing `` cost of insurance '' that cash value will be consumed and the policy lapse with no value at all . Whole Life policies have a guaranteed minimum interest paid into a cash value of the policy and this interest is compounded and grows tax-free . You have access to the cash value also tax-free . You may also use the cash value as a future income source for retirement . The best Cash Value policies are the Participating Whole Life policies with Mutual companies . These are eligible for Dividends on top of the guaranteed interest and will grow the cash value much faster .
Permanent life insurance is the type of life insurance that can have a cash value . Permanent life insurance includes all forms of Whole Life and Universal Life . Not all permanent policies have cash values . How much you pay in premium , and how much of your premium goes to pure protection vs building up cash values -LRB- as well as interest rates and other policy provisions -RRB- , will determine your cash value .
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
As David stated , only the owner of the policy can cash in a life insurance policy . It may need to be explained , as well , that not all life insurance polices can be cashed in , because not all life insurance policies have cash value . Even Whole and Universal Life policies usually take time to build up cash value , and Term policies never have cash value unless they have a return of premium feature . So , stated another way , only those who own policies that have cash value , can cash in their life insurance . But they can also borrow from their cash value , and that often is a better way to access the cash in the policy , so as not to give up the death benefit .
Universal life policies are somewhat tricky . What happens when you cancel a universal life policy depends on when you cancel the policy . In the beginning years of a UL it has no cash value accumulated , so if you cancel during that stage nothing happens other than the policy terminates . You get no money back . In the mid range years of the policy it will likely have some cash value , so if you cancel it during that period you may receive the cash value . In the later years of a UL , unless you have kept pace with the increasing `` cost of insurance '' , -LRB- in other words paid increasingly higher premiums -RRB- , the cash value that has accumulated may be reduced by they increasing cost of insurance until there is no more cash value remaining . At that point the policy may terminate . So if you cancel the policy while it has cash value you will receive the cash value . If there is no cash value when you cancel the policy it will simply terminate .
The concept of borrowing from a life insurance policy , whether it is a whole life or universal life insurance policy , is taxes . The idea of cash value life insurance is the ability to accumulate cash that is tax deferred . You may later in life or in your retirement be able to borrow down your cash value . This does two good things for you . It keeps your death benefit in tact , but can lower it as cash value is depleted and because you are borrowing your own money and the insurance company is charging you very low interest rate , Uncle Sam considers the money a loan and not income . This means your money is income tax free . Always seek the advice of your agent or company . There are a few caveats that you should be aware of while you are borrowing against your cash value life insurance policy , but it can be a very effective tool for you to use in retirement . You also have the choice to repay the cash value or not . Beware of cashing out your cash value life insurance policy because those proceeds are taxable .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does A Million Dollar Life Insurance Cost ?
The cost for a million dollar life policy is really not the factor or question in most cases well there would be many questions to ask first one would be are you insurable for that face value and for what purpose or needs you have for this amount . Second would you need a single premium because you have acquired a million dollars and you are looking to invest in a safe tax free invest we can look further in to this see my profile and contact me button for a free consultation .
I would n't be able to provide a figure for your without knowing more about what coverage structure you 're looking for and your medical history . The cost -LRB- premium -RRB- for a $ 1,000,000 life insurance policy depends on a number of factors so it will be different for everyone . These factors include their age , gender , how long they want the coverage for -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 year term insurance vs. permanent insurance -RRB- , and their risk classification -LRB- determined by the medical history -RRB- . The risk classification is the MOST critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends on a number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Please keep in mind - every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level and help determine which carrier will be able to offer you the desired coverage at the lowest possible cost . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are a lot of factors to calculate a premium on any life insurance amount . An agent needs to know the type of life insurance either term or permanent . From there we need age , build , life style , health status , occupation , state of residence and insurable interest . The first question is why do you need a million dollars in life insurance ?
Let me ask you this : expensive compared to what ? A Maserati is expensive compared to a Honda . A 50 room mansion is expensive compared to a studio apartment . The cost of hiring a chief executive officer for your company is expensive compared to the cost of hiring a file clerk . I think you have to look at what youre getting for your dollar . And what your other options might be . Lets suppose you go through prequalification . Then underwriting . Then you get approved . Then you get your policy and pay for it . You submit one monthly premium payment . And then tragically , you die . Your beneficiary will then get the full benefit . Within a week or so . You may have paid only a few hundred dollars , but the benefit could be in the millions . You may paid only a few thousand dollars , but the benefit could be in the tens of millions . That is a pretty good deal . Lets suppose your premium was $ 500 a month , and your benefit was $ 5 million . That could happen , depending on age and other underwriting factors . If you decided to not purchase life insurance , how much money would you have to invest , at what interest rate , over what period of time , to accumulate $ 5 million ? The fact of the matter is that for the vast majority of people , they would end up spending much more money on that investment than they would on life insurance . So the real question is why is self-insurance so expensive ? How can buying a life insurance policy be so much cheaper than trying to fund your financial security out of your own resources ? And dont forget the big game-changing factor : we never know when our time will come . Dont assume time will be on your side so you could eventually collect the money to self-insure .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
You can go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes to see what a million dollar term life insurance policy might cost for you . Some -LRB- like ours -RRB- will even allow you to put in some health information to get a more accurate quote , although your quote will never be optimally accurate until you have conversed with an agent . That last step of covering your health details completely can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars on a million dollar life insurance policy . And that way your agent can guide you to getting the most cost effect policy for your needs in the long run .
To see what a million dollar life insurance policy would cost for you , go to a website like ours that offers `` instant '' free quotes . There you can put in your gender , date of birth , height , weight , and even some health answers , so that you can see what a million dollars of coverage would cost for you . You will notice that the premium will be much lower if you pick a shorter term . That is because the rate will be locked in for a shorter period of time , and then you will need to get a new policy . To see what your new policy could cost at that age , you can use the same quote engine . But keep in mind that your health may not be as good then as it is now . Please feel free to call to discuss any variables or to see the price for $ 1,000,000 of permanent life insurance . It can be a lot of fun to mess around with quote engines and see what different face amounts may cost for different people .
To see what a million dollar life insurance policy might cost for you , you can visit a website that offers free , instant life insurance quotes . That way you can put in different term lengths and health factors to see what the cost for your million dollar life insurance policy would be for different products and with different risk factors . Contact the website personally to confirm your quote .
A 2 million dollar life insurance policy will cost much different rates for men and women , young adults and seniors , smokers and nonsmokers , those with perfect health and those who have multiple health conditions . The price also varies greatly according to how long the premium is locked in . Here are some examples of the cost of a 2 million dollar life insurance policy for a 40 year old male who has perfect health . 10 year term - approx $ 50/mo 20 year term - approx $ 100/mo 30 year term - approx $ 200/mo Permanent - approx $ 800/mo You can go to a website that offers instant quotes to see what a $ 2,000,000 policy costs at other ages , genders , etc. .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is : What does term life insurance cover ? Remember first of all , if we 're using term , it only covers that period in time . If you buy a 20-year term , as an example , it 's only going to cover you for 20 years . If you buy $ 1/2 million dollars of death benefit , you 'll have it for as long as you pay your premiums on time ; you 'll have that coverage . What is it good for ? How does it cover ? It 's going to cover anything that you think that you need . Let 's say , at $ 1/2 million , you had a mortgage at $ 250,000 , you had credit card debt , you had car debt , you had educational debt . You want to cover that so that your spouse or your beneficiaries will not be actually saddled with your debt if something happened to you . When I 'm looking at , ` What does term life insurance ? ' it 's the time zone , how long do I have , what obligations would I have , and how can I relieve my beneficiaries from any of those obligations if something happens to me ?
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How many life insurance policies can I have ? '' Well , actually you can have as many as you want as long as the death benefit does n't exceed the justification issue , which is the companies will say , `` We think that your exposure on your life is worth , '' let 's say a million dollars . So if you have four or five policies and they total up to a million and as long as it did not exceed what they call financial justification you can multiple policies and many people do . But remember , the total amount of insurance on all these policies are going to be shown on the application . And so when you take the total , as long as it does n't exceed what they believe is your economic justification , it does n't exceed it , you 'll be able to get as much insurance as you want up to that limit .
The cost of one million dollars worth of life insurance depends on the length of coverage : term life insurance from 5-30 years or permanent life insurance to age 121 . But it also depends on your gender , age , smoking status , health history , current medical condition and whether the coverage is one one life or two . A million dollars of 20 year term life insurance on a male non smoker age 62 is around $ 10,000 annually .
You dont have to bother if you dont have to . At least in this country for the time being , life insurance is not something that the government forces us to buy . And I hope the day never comes , because it would really mess up the life insurance marketplace . So the purchase of life insurance is voluntary . Who , then , should buy it ? If you are a billionaire , should you buy life insurance ? Sure you should . Lets suppose your estate would owe the government $ 100 million in taxes when you die . To pay this fee , your heirs might have to liquidate a bunch of businesses and buildings and other assets . They would then pay the bill dollar for dollar . Or , you could buy life insurance and pay the bill for pennies on the dollar . And keep all your assets intact as an inheritance for your heirs . Not only that : lets suppose you started a foundation to eliminate world hunger or some other noble cause . Lets suppose you wanted to leave the charity $ 100 million as a gift when you died . If you bought a life insurance policy and left that to the charity , you would only have to pay a few cents in premium for every dollar a benefit . You would have that much more money left over for other good causes . A very good use of your money . Now , lets suppose youre not a billionaire . Should you buy life insurance ? Heres the question : do you have a more economical way to take care of your family ? They have become dependent upon you . Why force them to reduce their standard of living when you die ? You could start putting money away into a fund . But what happens if you tragically died next year ? Would you have really accumulated enough money to let them live their lives ? Life insurance would provide them with all the money they need as soon as it is needed . No other financial product comes to the rescue like that . Why not die looking like a hero , as someone who cared and took measures to provide for his love ones ?
The premium for a million dollar policy will depend on your age , gender , tobacco status , health , build , and certain risk factors . It also depends on how long the premium is locked in . E.g. . The cost for a permanent policy would be more than for a term policy , because the premium is locked in for life . You can use a quote engine offering `` instant '' quotes to input some different variables to see what a million dollar policy could cost for you or others . Please converse with an agent by phone , email , or in person before purchasing your policy . Getting with the right company is important with a policy this large , because there is a lot to be saved when you get the lowest premium .
The cost for a million dollar life policy is really not the factor or question in most cases well there would be many questions to ask first one would be are you insurable for that face value and for what purpose or needs you have for this amount . Second would you need a single premium because you have acquired a million dollars and you are looking to invest in a safe tax free invest we can look further in to this see my profile and contact me button for a free consultation .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Life insurance is a responsible thing to purchase and provides invaluable protection but I would not refer to it as an investment . First and foremost , 75 million US families rely on life insurance because of what it does : Provide a tax-free death benefit to protect people and businesses using discounted dollars . The cash value in permanent life insurance is a valuable secondary feature which helps keep premiums low for later in life when the pure cost of insurance would be prohibitively high . The internal rate of return on the cash value can be projected based on current assumptions and should compare favorably to other conservative long term savings products but wo n't likely compare favorably to investments subject to market risks . As basic savings vehicle , insurance cash value is important . In fact , 20 % of long term savings in this country are in life insurance and annuities which form the foundation of savings for millions of families .
I guess a `` Unit '' of life insurance is a term that can have a number of different meanings . The answers given above here by Peggy and Tim , both saying that a `` unit '' is $ 1000 must be accurate , but in the policies I 've read where costs are being analyzed it clearly says , `` per $ 1000 '' etc. . In sales I 've never heard or read of someone referring to 100 units or 500 units of insurance when they mean a $ 100,000 or $ 500,000 policy . I 've always understood a `` unit '' of life insurance to mean a one Million dollar policy . A `` half Unit '' policy would then be a $ 500,000 policy and so on . So when an agent is talking to you about `` one Unit '' of life insurance I 'm relatively sure they mean a $ 1,000,000 policy . `` One Unit '' sounds like just a little thing whereas `` a Million Dollar '' policy sounds like quite a bit to most people !
You have to justify the amount of coverage for any life insurance policy . If youre assets or financial liabilities warrant a million dollar policy , then most life insurance companies will be willing to issue the policy . Keep in mind that actual earnings can bemused in the calculation for a million dollars of coverage if assets or liabilities dont generate enough justification .
Anyone can buy Life Insurance . The wealthy are shrewd with financial dealings . As an advisor many offers are dealing with estate preservation . They are good with investment products due to their high financial assets . They buy at a higher premium amount to accumulate more wealth as what the advantage of Life Insurance permits . At a higher payment for the policy . They can use the lump sum to keep taxes from cutting into the estate . They can cash in higher on cash values of the policy for the accumulation is higher due to the high investments . Finally , along with the lump sum millions they receive . People also can use this advantage at lower incomes if you like and would spend hundreds of dollars a month for a multi million dollar policy . It is always best to get the preferred rate at a younger age for lower premiums . My specialty .
end question
