start question
home-insurance
How Long Does It Take To Get Money From Home Insurance ?
It certainly depends on the carrier , the type of claim , and how much damage was caused . If you are talking about a `` catastrophe '' claim this can take much longer because of the scope of damage and the number of people impacted . Sometimes insurance carriers will have to out-source a 3rd party to handle claim adjustments if the claim is that big like tornado damage that causes damage to many . If you are talking about a claim where the only damage was your residence you should expect to see a field adjuster within 3-5 business days to make the initial estimate . From there , a check could be issued as quick as 24 hours or another 3-5 business days . More than likely the first check you receive will be a partial based on the ACV of your personal property and dwelling .
Insurance companies want to adjust claims as quickly as possible . In most cases they are eager to get the claimants release . The claim is not adjusted however , until the claimant signs the release . There are a variety of circumstances that could delay that release from being signed and sometimes the company will make interim payments to reduce the stress on the claimant . Delays could be in reconstruction , possible fault of a third-party , and legal issues . Sometimes it has to do with a lawsuit and can not be resolved until the case is settled .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
That is a great question ! Whenever you deposit money into an account , be it at your bank , credit union , or annuity fund , that money does n't just sit there in a box labelled `` you '' . The financial institution immediately takes the money from the `` you '' box , and uses it to cover their expenses , pay out someone else , or invest it to make their profits . When you take that money out early , it costs them , as they were planning on it being there until the annuitization phase of your annuity was scheduled to begin . Now they have to scramble to get the money back into the `` you '' box . That often costs them money from the interest they were earning by using the money you 'd put in your `` box '' . To recapture some of their loss , and to act as an incentive to deter you from pulling out your `` box '' early , they assess the surrender charges . You will notice that they are highest at the beginning of your annuity , and decrease as time goes on . That is because the longer your money stays with them , the more likely it is that they 've earned what they needed to to repay your money with it 's promised interest . Does that help ? I hope so , feel free to contact me if it does n't , okay ? Thanks for asking !
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies will set a commencement date far enough ahead into the future to show you an impressive number for your return , and that is the date by which you must have started taking your withdrawals . The truth is that you can take money out at any time , BUT - there are serious consequences if you are n't careful . An annuity is not a suitable product for someone who has cash flow issues , and might need the money sooner than later . I 'd advise you to look at your policy , and look for these things : Do I have a free withdrawal amount , if so , how much and when can I start taking it ? How long is the surrender period , and what are the charges ? -LRB- If the surrender period is ten years , that means every year during that period , whatever you withdraw will be subject to that fee , among likely others , as well as a federal penalty of 10 % if you are younger than 59 1/2 -RRB- The last thing to look at is what triggers if you pull money out . Does it start , or lock in a payment cycle for you ? Again , that could be disastrous if you are n't very careful . Let the money ride in there as long as you can afford to , -LRB- at least until you are 60 -RRB- and then start taking your withdrawals . Depending on how your annuity is structured , you may be required to start your rmd 's at the age of 70 1/2 . If you 'd like help with your specifics , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Long Term Care Insurance is recommended for those having considerable assets . If you needed to go to a nursing home or assisted living facility , or receive home health care to assist you with your activities of daily living -LRB- dressing , eating , bathing , etc -RRB- , those institutions can go after your savings and investments while you are alive -LRB- if your spouse is alive , he/she can keep half -RRB- , and even take the proceeds from your home after you and your spouse die . If you have very little in the way of assets , long term care insurance is an unnecessary expense . But if you have assets you would like to protect , and can afford the premium , having long term care insurance is an excellent tool in planning your future , preserving your peace of mind , and paying the bills if needed . And a word about life insurance policies with living benefits . I am all in favor of them , but you do need to consider how much is `` enough '' when purchasing life insurance that you may want to use if you can no longer care for yourself . Nursing home costs average nearly $ 80,000 per year , nationally , for a semi-private room . Someone wanting to hire a round the clock caregiver in their home can expect to pay over $ 175,000 per year -LRB- $ 20 per hour -RRB- . It can be expensive to buy a permanent life insurance policy with face amounts large enough to cover even a couple years of care . Just be sure you understand how much of the life insurance face amount is available to you , what triggers it takes to get it , and when you can get it . Then compare it to the price of buying long term care insurance providing comparable benefits .
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
When taking money from a Life Insurance Policy you need to consider the impact on your policy when you take a withdrawal or a loan . Both are available within your policy providing you have the cash value available . A withdrawal is taking money out of the cash value , with no intention of putting it back into the policy . The death benefit will be reduced in most cases as well as the remaining cash value . As long as the withdrawal is less than the money you have paid into the policy , there should not be a taxable event . If you do exceed the money you have paid in , then you will have to pay taxes on the amount over . On the other hand , a loan is a great option especially if you want to pay back the money taken . Look at your policy to understand the loan provisions . There is a fixed rate and most likely a variable rate . Depending how the policy credits money , and what the expected future growth might be , will determine which loan option may work best . Sometimes clients will take a withdrawal up to the cost basis , the premium you have paid in , then switch to a loan to minimize any tax burden . Like mentioned on the other comments , if you have a loan and the policy lapses , you will a potential taxable event which at the end of the current tax year , you will get the appropriate statement/form from the insurance company . Please consult your agent/broker prior to making any decisions .
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Disability Insurance Deductible ?
If you have a business with operational expenses you may be able to deduct disability insurance premiums . Keep in mind that having disability insurance deducted as a business expense can increase the amount of coverage up to 80 % of your compensation . However , any benefits paid out with be taxed as ordinary income at your effective tax bracket rate .
For the average person with an individual disability policy , the answer is no , disability insurance is not tax deductible . However , then if a disability occurs , and the need for the policy to pay out , the payments received will not be taxed . However way you are able to set it up , either the premiums are taxed or the benefit is taxed .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
If you dont deduct your disability insurance premium as a business expense , your disability benefits are tax free . But if you do deduct your disability insurance premium , then your disability benefits are taxable at ordinary income tax rates . The advantage of the deduction is the disability insurance company will cover up to 80 % of your compensation , compared to 60 % if you dont deduct it . You need to determine you effective tax bracket rate to analyze which is better for your situation .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
Either you are referring to the best disability insurance company or the best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance . There are several excellent disability companies in the disability market place . One of the best is The Standard . The best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance is to determine if you can expense the premium as a business deduction and apply for 80 % of your compensation . While it is true that any benefits received will be subject to ordinary income tax , a deduction today is worth the risk of taxable event in the future . Nondeductible disability protects up to 60 % of your compensation with tax free distribution of benefits . If youre in a high tax bracket , the spread in benefits -LRB- 80 % versus 60 % -RRB- and the savings in the annual deduction are incentives to expense the premium if you have a legitimate business . Keep in mind that you can also buy disability insurance to cover your qualified plan contributions as well .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Is disability insurance deductible for taxes ? Depends on your situation . If you are an employee who has their disability coverage through a payroll deduction program , it can be deducted for taxes through their payroll plan . Self employed individuals can also deduct disability insurance from their taxes . Please note , in either case when you deduct premium , the benefit becomes taxable income .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability insurance is not deductible as a medical expense . However , it can be deducted as a business expense for those who are self employed and own their own Disability Insurance policies . Keep in mind that if you declare your Disability Insurance premiums as a tax deduction , the disability benefit that would normally go to you tax free in the event of you becoming disabled , would then likely be taxable .
Your health insurance deductible is the amount that the covered individual must pay out of their own pocket before the health insurance plan begins paying for covered health care expenses . Deductibles can vary from one insurance policy to another . As an example , let 's say you have a health insurance policy with a $ 2000 deductible followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that amount.You are thenhospitalized for heart surgery under this policy and the total bill is $ 50,000 . You would be 100 % financially responsible for the first $ 2000 of that bill -LRB- your deductible -RRB- and the health insurance carrier would pay the remaining $ 48,000 . You have `` met '' your deductible by incurring expenses in excess of your plan 's deductible . As many healthcare providers and hospitals will tell you , there is a difference in someone `` meeting '' their deductible and actually paying their deductible expenses . So , inour example , as long as the policy holder keeps paying their health insurance premiums their health insurance will remain in effect even if the policy holder pays none or only a portion of their $ 2000 deductible amount . This is why a growing number of consumers are receiving demands for upfront payment of their deductible and co-insurance cost sharing amounts from some healthcare providers before they will provide services . I just had a friend ask me about this very situation for one of her coworkers who had recently learned she was pregnant and who was told by their OB/GYN that they wanted payment for the person 's $ 1500 deductible and their 30 % co-insurance cost sharing for the OB/GYN to provide their services to that person .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
If you have a legitimate business , that expenses operation costs , you may qualify for a deduction for disability insurance premiums . And tax deductible disability insurance allows for the purchase a greater benefit than nondeductible disability premium . However , tax deductible disability insurance benefits are taxable at ordinary income tax rates .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
end question
start question
annuities
When Are Annuities Taxed ?
Non-qualified tax deferred annuities that have gain in their contract will pay ordinary income tax on the distributions , whether by withdrawals , period certain payouts or life only annuitization . Distributions of basis are tax free . You only pay taxes on an annuity when distributions are made or at the death of the annuitant .
Annuities are taxed when benefits are distributed . If the annuity is a part of a Roth IRA or Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- the benefit is tax free if the contract is at least five years old and the annuitant is 59.5 years old . Tax treatment of other annuities depends on the portion of the annuity that was purchased with after-taxed dollars , in which case the taxation is on the interest earned . If the annuity is inside an IRA or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- it will be taxed as ordinary income .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Annuities are always taxable when gain is withdrawn from the annuity unless the annuity is placed inside a Roth account . Annuities do defer taxes when no money is removed from the annuity , so if no withdrawal , the gain is not realized until it is withdrawn from the annuity . Annuities use the Last in Last out -LRB- LIFO -RRB- accounting rule , which means gain in the annuity must be withdrawn before basis is removed , unless the annuity is annuitized . For annuities with a cost basis -LRB- i.e. non tax deducted/qualified -RRB- annuitization uses a tax rule known as the exclusion ratio to make part of the income stream gain and part non-taxable basis .
An annuity is a systematic method of accumulation and liquidation of money that you desire to set aside for a later retirement . In the accumulation phase you mostly make deposits into your account . In the liquidation phase , you can take money from the account to provide a steady monthly income for a period of years , and even for the balance of your life . Annuities pay interest like a savings account . Unlike a bank savings account , you do n't pay income tax on the interest gained until you begin liquidating your account with either a stream of payments of lump withdrawals . When interest you earn is not taxed today , it has a chance to compound and grow faster . The government will get to tax your gain at a later time , when you start taking out the money . Some annuities can be deducted from income on your 1040 tax statement and this also helps your retirement funds grow faster . These types of annuities are referred to as `` qualified annuities '' because the annuity meets the tax law qualifications that permit taking a reduction of income for the annuity deposit . While there are lots of rules , if you go back to the start and realize that an annuity is nothing more than a method of accumulating money for retirement , and also a method of distributing money from the account in retirement , you get most of what an annuity really is . Good luck .
Annuity withdrawals from a non-registered immediate or payout annuity consist of an interest portion and a return of capital portion . In Canada , you are not taxed on the return of capital portion , but you are taxed on the interest portion . Think of annuities as the opposite of a mortgage . In a 25 year mortgage , early payments consist of mostly interest with little going towards the principle . With an annuity , the early payments you receive are mostly taxable interest and a little of your own principle . For those individuals who can qualify , a prescribed annuity equalizes the interest income . For example , with a 25 year annuity the total interest earned is divided by 25 and spread out equally over the term of the contact . Increased after tax income in the early years is the result . There are specific rules governing prescribed annuities , If you are interested in more information , please contact me . Income from a payout annuity may qualify for income splitting for income tax purposes . This allows you to transfer up to 50 % of the taxable income earned from the payout annuity . Missing out on the federal pension income income tax credit ? Income from a payout annuity may qualify for the $ 2,000 non-refundable tax credit . Note : Interest earned on a Guaranteed Investment Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also may qualify . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
In Canada , immediate and deferred annuities are , with one exception , taxed on an accrual basis . The growth or income is taxed as earned , not as received . How the income is taxed , depends , if it is interest income or , in the case of Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , interest , dividends or capital gains . Prescribed Annuities enjoy special taxation -LRB- Section 304 of Income Tax Act -RRB- . They are taxed on a straight line basis rather than on an accrual basis . If you qualify for a prescribed annuity then total amount of `` expected '' interest is averaged based on the number of payments . For example invest in a prescribed life income annuity and your `` life expectancy '' is 22 years . The amount of investment DIVIDED BY `` life expectancy '' EQUALS return of your principle and it is not taxed . The annuity payment SUBTRACT the return of your principle is taxable . The tax savings can be substantial , which is why prescribed annuities are often used to increase after tax income . Especially for those who prefer guaranteed interest income . A life insurance policy can replace the capital for your estate . Depending on the the individual circumstances , increases of after tax income can be 50 % or more . Implementing a strategy involving payout annuities is sometimes complicated , it is however , always permanent . Search for Retirement / Financial planner in your area . Then look for an experienced life insurance broker with a professional designation such as a CLU or CFP . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please contact me .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
Variable Annuities are taxed just the same as a traditional Fixed Annuity . If the Annuity is not in an IRA or other Qualified Plan , then any withdrawal is subject to capitol gains tax , both Federal and State . This is just on the `` Gains '' of the policy . If the Annuity is in an IRA or Qualified Retirement Plan , then withdrawals are taxed as Income . It is also important to note that any withdrawal before age 59 1/2 , is subject to a 10 % tax penalty . This is for IRA & non IRA Annuities . If the Annuity is a Variable Immediate Annuity , which pays an income stream to you , then things are a bit different . If it is an IRA then all income payments are taxed as Income . If it is not an IRA , then it is taxed under the exclusion ration . This `` excludes '' a certain percentage of the income from taxes , since it is considered basis -LRB- principle -RRB- .
While the answer is - `` YES '' , you can combine annuities - it is important to bear in mind that some annuities have different tax treatment than others . My advice is to only combine annuity money of a similar nature with that of another . For example , an IRA -LRB- individual Retirement Account -RRB- provides a deduction on the IRS 1040 against income . Because of this feature and tax benefit , all money coming out of an IRA , both interest and basis , are taxed as income upon distribution . In other words , because of the tax deduction , distributions from an IRA are taxed as if all the money coming from the account is being taxed for the first time . An ordinary tax qualified annuity , a non-IRA annuity , incurs taxation only on the gain at the time of distribution . This exclusion formula recognizes that some of the money deposited was already taxed as ordinary income when you first earned it and this money will not be taxed again at distribution . That is why I suggest honoring the character of the money and keeping IRA 's with IRA 's , etc. . This simple rule of thumb will help relieve you of explaining years later the source or the money and help you argue successfully that some money should not be taxed . Who among us will remember 30-40 years hence how these accounts were merged ? There are a whole other set of rules for conversions and methods to avoid taxation prior to annuitization and the beginning of the payout period of your annuities . This answer covers general theory only on the idea you want to minimize taxation to the largest extent possible .
If you purchase a deferred annuity with pre-tax money , the entire balance , including the gains will be taxable . As long as the money stays inside the annuity , the taxation is deferred . A deferred annuity has an accumulation phase and a distribution phase . During accumulation , the annuity grows untaxed . When the annuity is paid out during the distribution phase , the payouts are taxed at ordinary income tax rates for you during that year . If you buy a deferred annuity with after tax dollars then a portion of the payouts will be a tax free return of your principal . It is considered `` last in , first out '' meaning that withdrawals are taxed until the interest and earnings portion is depleted . After that , your principal can be withdrawn without taxes .
How are annuity gains taxed ? Well , depending on how you funded the annuity and how you choose to distribute from the annuity the answer and be part of the distribution to all of the distribution . If you use qualified money to fund your annuity , you 've skipped paying taxes on those funds . This means when you have the funds distributed the entire amount is taxable . If you paid taxes on the money used to fund the annuity , you only pay taxes on the gains liquidated . The distribution is basically split in half for tax purposes . One thing as you consider distribution from your annuity . . only the money actually taken out is taxed , so taking funds out on a regular basis means you only pay taxes on what comes out of the policy .
Annuities are used for retirement as a source of regular income . Your annuity is tax deferred until you take out payments . The contributions you put into an annuity are not taxed , and the earnings are taxed at your tax rate during retirement . Therefore , they can be a tax favorable way of earning supplemental income during retirement . If you take out an immediate annuity , you contribute a lump sum and can begin to take out regular payments nearly immediately . A deferred annuity allows you to make payments into it over a number of years , then annuitize the annuity to receive regular payments . These payments are generally used to add to Social Security benefits and other income during retirement . Variable annuities make your annuity more of an investment , with the risks that come with variable products . Indexed annuities also allow for more growth but protect the original contribution .
You can generally withdraw money from an annuity at any time . However , you may be subject to a penalty and taxes . Annuities are generally meant to be long-term or at least a specified term such as 5 , 7 , 10 or more years . Each contact will have rules on how much you can take out annually without any penalty . Often it is 10 percent per year , after the first year . If you withdraw above the penalty-free withdrawal amount , you will pay a penalty . This annuity schedule is part of the contract and if you have questions about how to interpret , contact the agent that sold you the annuity or another qualified agent . Taxes will likely apply to any withdrawals at your ordinary income tax rate for that year . Also remember that if your annuity is a non-qualified account -LRB- not a Roth or IRA -RRB- and you withdraw prior to age 59 1/2 , the first dollars you withdraw will be considered your gain and be taxed at whatever your ordinary tax rate is for that year . There are ways to avoid the penalty -LRB- not the tax -RRB- for the withdrawal under section 72 -LRB- t -RRB- of the IRS code but you would have to agree to take level distributions until age 59 1/2 or for 5 years , whichever is longer . If you do n't follow this rule , you will be subject to a 10 % penalty going back to when you started early withdrawals from your annuity . Annuities can be a great product when the `` fit '' is correct . Your agent should make sure it is suitable upfront for your specific needs so you can avoid getting into an early withdrawal situation .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Cash Value Protected From Creditors In Colorado ?
In the state of Colorado cash values are protected for both bankruptcy and non-bankruptcy claims up to $ 50,000 . Federal bankruptcies are not protected . However all monies placed into the contract 48 months prior to the claim against the contract owner are not included -LRB- i.e. not protected -RRB- .
Life insurance in Colorado that is left to a beneficiary who is a person , and not the estate , is protected from creditors . Once it goes to the beneficiary , the only creditors that can try to get it are those the beneficiary owes money to , not who the deceased insured person owed money to .
Life insurance in Colorado that is left to a beneficiary who is a person , and not the estate , is protected from creditors . Once it goes to the beneficiary , the only creditors that can try to get it are those the beneficiary owes money to , not who the deceased insured person owed money to .
Every state is a bit different however In Colorado , where I am located , car insurance is mandatory for all drivers . Auto insurance is enforced by the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies which is part of the Department of Insurance . Colorado was a no-fault state until 2003 , when they changed the regulations to what is referrd to as TORT meaning fault has to be established first before claims will be paid .
There are assets protected from creditors by federal and/or state statute . Those assets are considered essential for the debtor to maintain at least a financial well-being . Creditor protection is balanced by the concerns for creditor 's rights to access the debtor 's assets . Annuities can be argued as a legitimate retirement plan like IRAs . Some states exempt annuities from the claims of creditors . Each state has differing views and regulations on the claims of creditors . Seek out legal counsel to determine what assets are protected from claims of creditors .
Whether life insurance cash value is protected from creditors depends on what state the policyholder resides in . In the state of our home office -LRB- Arizona -RRB- , 100 % of the cash value of life insurance is protected from creditors when the policy has been in existence over two years and the beneficiary is a family dependent . In my home state of Nebraska , only $ 100,000 of the cash value is exempt .
Good question ! Creditor protection is an important concern , especially for the self-employed . There are basically two types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Both are considered insurance products and as such can offer creditor protection under certain circumstances . Immediate annuities , as the name suggests , provide an immediate income stream in exchange for a lump sum . They are often used to provide a guaranteed income in retirement planning . Deferred annuities are accumulation products that have the option of an annuity at some point in the future . In Canada for example , they can be Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- , that are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GIC -RRB- or Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- that are similar to mutual funds . With both types of annuities , in order to offer creditor protection , you would need to have been solvent when you put the money into the contracts . In other words , you would not have been trying to attempt fraud . If the above condition is met , the income flow from immediate annuities is afforded creditor protection . Deferred annuities , like insurance policies , receive creditor protection based on the beneficiary designation . Eligible beneficiaries include those in the `` protected class '' : spouse , parents , children and grandchildren . In addition , irrevocable beneficiaries also qualify . Please check with a lawyer for your individual situation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The premiums for life insurance in Colorado vary widely . Age is big factor , as a younger person can get a policy at just a fraction of what a senior person would pay . Gender , health , tobacco , driving record , substance abuse , and dangerous hobbies or travel all affect the price . Then add to that the fact that shorter guarantees contribute to a lower price , and it truly is impossible to answer this question without more information . To find the cost of a Term life insurance policy in Colorado , you can go to a website that offers instant quotes and input different criteria . That will give you an idea of what prices are .
Medicare does not cover dental care in Colorado , as a rule . Only if the oral care is needed to treat another general health condition , or to prepare the mouth for treatments involved in treating another general health condition , is dental treatment covered by Medicare in Colorado or the other 49 states .
Auto insurance is required to register your can and to legally drive in Colorado . If you are caught driving without proof of insurance , the fines are extensive -LRB- as shown in Colorado Statute 42-4-1409 -RRB- : Four points against your driver license . First offense : minimum $ 500 fine , and license suspension until you can show proof to the Division of Motor Vehicles that you are insured . Second offense : minimum $ 1,000 fine and license suspension for four months . Third and subsequent offenses : minimum $ 1,000 fine and license suspension for eight months . Courts may add up to 40 hours community service to the above penalties .
To answer this question on how much do agents make in Colorado i would like to recognize the opportunity you have . We all know it depends on how hard you work but the key is to become a master marketer . Colorado has many opportunities with small businesses , families and individuals . The retirement niche is a growing market with a lot of opportunity . Contact a local marketing organization like to get more details .
The cheapest long term care insurance company in Colorado varies according to the person who is applying . Some companies are better at older ages ; some are better for couples . Some are better for -LRB- or are the only ones that will take -RRB- certain health conditions . Some offers certain features at a lower price than others . To find the cheapest long term care insurance for you , contact an agency that sells a variety of long term care companies in Colorado and review your health and all the features offered with a knowledgeable agent . Together , you can work out which has the lowest price for what you qualify for and what you need .
In Canada , products issued by a life insurance company , life insurance , annuities , investment funds -LRB- segregated fund , variable annuities -RRB- are afforded creditor protection if : The beneficiary is in the preferred class : spouse , child , grandchild or parent of the life insured or The beneficiary is irrevocable beneficiary . -LRB- No changes to contract can be made without written permission of an irrevocable beneficiary -RRB- Protection is in cases of unforeseen bankruptcy . Since there are circumstances where creditor protection may not apply , it is recommended that you consult a legal advisor to find out if you are eligible for this protection . When the death when received is an asset of the beneficiary and is protected from the creditors of the policy owner . No protection if the beneficiary is the policy owners 's estate . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A spendthrift clause in some life insurance policies is intended to protect the beneficiary of the policy proceeds from creditors by paying the policy proceeds as periodic income rather than in a lump sum . Some policies allow the policy owner to select this settlement option for the beneficiary . Otherwise , the beneficiary selects this . The payout could be arranged as a fixed payment for as long as the money lasts or for a fixed period of time . The proceeds are then usually protected from creditors . Creditor protection via life insurance varies by state and may provide only limited protection . Contact your legal adviser for more on how this might apply in your situation .
Life insurance must be distributed to a beneficiary and not the estate to remain exempt from the deceaseds creditors . The beneficiaries creditors would be able to go after the life insurance proceeds . Most retirement accounts and cash value within a life insurance policy are exempt from creditors and can be retained , even through bankruptcy . One way creditors sometimes get to the funds is if life insurance proceeds are deposited into what was a joint checking account that the creditor had access to . While a person may be able to have the funds returned through legal proceedings , it is often best to close the joint account and open a new account .
Colorado as a state does not require you to have renters insurance . However , many apartments & homes alike which are available to rent may require you to have renters insurance . This kind of insurance is very affordable and is recommended for everyone who rents . Be sure to look at the policy however . I would recommend getting the insurance which gives you replacement value vs. current value . Will cost you a little more but well worth it .
In the state of Colorado cash values are protected for both bankruptcy and non-bankruptcy claims up to $ 50,000 . Federal bankruptcies are not protected . However all monies placed into the contract 48 months prior to the claim against the contract owner are not included -LRB- i.e. not protected -RRB- .
While it appears simple on its face , the life insurance exemption from creditor claims can be very confusing . It is the opinion of some attorneys who specialize in life insurance law that the only way to truly protect life insurance proceeds from creditors of the insured is to have the policy owned by an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . Similarly , the only way to protect the proceeds form the creditors of the beneficiary is to have the proceeds paid into a discretionary spendthrift trust instead of directly to the beneficiary . Obviously these are issues that should be discussed with a qualified estate planning attorney . If you do n't know one , chances are that your life insurance agent will be able to refer you to one . This type of advanced planning may not be justified in ordinary circumstances . However if there is a good possibility that there could be claims by creditors of either the insured or the beneficiary , then the use of appropriate trusts should be considered .
Credit Life Insurance contracts are designed to protect the creditor and the borrower 's family from incurring a loss due to the death of the borrower . A life insurance policy is taken out on the borrower for the amount of the loan or credit extended . The named beneficiary is the creditor who extends the loan / credit . Should the borrower die before the loan is paid off the creditor is paid by the insurance policy and therefore also protects the family of the borrower from incurring the debt . Typically these policies are `` decreasing Term '' policies , which decrease in value as the loan is paid down .
Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- does not vary by state . Plan F in Florida is the same as a Plan F in Colorado . However , the monthly premium can be different from state to state . Medicare Advantage Plans can vary by state because of the network , etc. . The plans are based on which county you live in and different counties have different plans .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Auto Insurance Follow The Vehicle Or The Driver ?
In general auto insurance follows the vehicle . For example if Bob loans his car to James and James has an accident with it , Bob 's insurance will be the primary insurance responding to the accident . If for for some reason Bob 's insurance turned was invalid or the damages were so large that his insurance was exhausted then James ' insurance would respond as a secondary coverage .
Automobile insurance follows the car in California . The car is rated on a number of factors but primary information is the household connected to the automobile . All the drivers in the household are covered by the policy unless excluded . Recently there was quite an expensive crash involving an excluded driver who resided in the household where the car was rated . This creates enormous difficulties for everyone .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
School bus drivers comprise an important part of my business . In the first place , insurance follows the vehicle not the driver . It is the employer , be that a school district or a commercial bus operator who will insure the vehicle not the individual driver . The policy that covers the bus is a commercial auto policy and is underwritten on a fleet basis with a list of drivers . The individual driver is not involved with that process . Bus drivers usually drive a personally owned vehicle . The requirements for obtaining insurance on that personal vehicle are the same as they are for someone who is not driving a bus . The fact that school bus drivers in particular must carefully guard their driving record to maintain their employment makes them particularly good prospects for insurance on the personal vehicles that they own and operate .
I 'm afraid you have confused what comprehensive insurance means . In regards to comprehensive insurance , `` comprehensive '' is a component of auto insurance , but not a type of insurance . comprehensive coverage protects your vehicle from losses that occur by means other than collision . Examples include theft , vandalism , weather damage , hitting a deer , etc. . As far as borrowing someone else 's vehicle , your auto insurance does n't cover you . Their insurance does . That is , auto insurance always follows the vehicle , not the driver .
Auto coverage will vary slightly depending on your state . However auto insurance is typically broken down into the following coverages : Liability Bodily Injury - Pays to cover the medical expenses of the damaged party -LRB- typically another driver and their passengers -RRB- if you cause an accident . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . There is a limit per person and an aggregate limit per accident . Liability Physical Damage - Pays to cover damage to vehicles or other physical property -LRB- mailbox , guardrail , traffic signal , etc. -RRB- caused by the insured -LRB- you -RRB- . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . Uninsured Motorist Liability & Uninsured Motorist Physical Damage - This coverage protects the insured against motorists without insurance or with insufficient limits to cover medical and physical damages to the insured . This pays up to the per person and aggregate limits listed on the policy . Collision - Pays the cost to repair/replace your vehicle if you hit something/someone minus the deductible listed on your policy . Note that if your vehicle is a total loss then you will be compensated based on the actual cash value of your vehicle which is the value of your vehicle considering depreciation . Other Than Collision -LRB- Comprehensive -RRB- - This coverage pays to repair/replace your vehicle for theft , vandalism , hail , damage by animals , etc minus the deductible on your policy . If your vehicle is a total loss it will be valued on an actual cash value basis . Personal Injury Protection - Pays for medical/disability expenses of the insured for an injury occurring in or around your vehicle up to the limit listed on the policy . Accidental Death & Dismemberment - Small life insurance component often added to auto policies that will pay a death benefit if you die or are permanently disabled in an auto accident . Towing/Roadside Assistance - Varies significantly by company and state Rental Coverage - Covers the cost of a rental vehicle for the time that your vehicle is in the shop due to a covered loss . There are multiple levels and this coverage may not cover the full cost of the rental .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
If a person is not listed on the same policy as you they are not covered by the policy just because they are driving your vehicle . Auto insurance typically follows the driver not the vehicle . This means if someone drives your vehicle and they have their own insurance coverage their insurance carrier would be the first to pay for claims from a covered accident that the driver was involved in . If the person driving the vehicle with your permission does not have insurance coverage then your insurance coverage would pick up in the event of a covered accident .
Auto insurance typically follows the driver first and then the vehicle . If you have auto insurance coverage on your vehicle and allow another person to drive the vehicle and they do not have auto insurance coverage your auto insurance coverage would typically apply if they were involved in an fault accident less your deductible . This could potentially put you at financial risk , risk of a rate hike , or even possible cancellation or non-renewal .
All licensed drivers must appear named on your auto policy . If a company refuses to insure your vehicle if a particular driver operates the vehicle , they do that by offering exclusion . Coverage is suspended if that driver operates that vehicle . We often have drivers who are excluded and we secure coverage with another company that does insured such drivers making that driver the primary driver on one of the cars .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
The rule of thumb with auto insurance is , it follows the driver first and the vehicle second . If you are driving a vehicle that is not yours your auto insurance will typically provide coverage for the accident first and then if the claim exceeds your coverage a claim could also be charged against the vehicle owners auto insurance coverage .
There are loopholes in Ohio law . But generally speaking , if you have a valid drivers license , then you can buy auto insurance . If you do not have a valid drivers license , you can still buy auto insurance if you own a vehicle . But you will have to have a driver on the policy with a valid drivers license , such as a spouse , family member . In this case , you will have to exclude yourself as a driver -LRB- meaning there is no coverage if you drive the vehicle -RRB- . Most auto insurance companies will also require you to designated a licensed driver as the named insured . Drivers can also be insured using a valid foreign drivers license . But not all companies will do this . So you will need to look around a little harder . Also , understand that Ohio has 2 different laws on the table that are completely opposed to one another . So these laws could change drastically in months to come , if either of these proposals go into effect .
Any licensed driver that resides in your household must be included on the auto insurance policies written on cars belonging to your household . There isnt an option . A licensed driver can not sit on a shelf and not be rated on an existing automobile . If the insurance company can determine which vehicle the inexperienced operator drives , they will rate the youthful driver as the primary driver unless there are more drivers than vehicles . Even then the youthful driver will be listed as an occasional operator on one of the vehicles . It is best to consult with your agent to determine the best car for the inexperienced driver to operate . The charge for a youthful driver is generally a percentage of the normal premium , so assigning the youthful driver to a car with a low premium generally makes the best sense .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
Auto insurance follows the car . The car is assigned to a household -LRB- address . -RRB- All the drivers in the household are considered when the insurance company issues the policy . Technically this would mean that a husband and wife living in the same household could not have separate policies . It does happen particularly when one has a very bad driving record and the preferred company refuses to insure that driver . Other substandard insurance companies will cover the driver in which case you have husbands and wives insured separately with different companies . The driver with the bad record is probably excluded from the car assigned to the driver with a good record .
Non Owner auto insurance is available through independent insurance agencies . Non Owner insurance is liability insurance for your drivers license . It does not cover a specific vehicle . Insurance always follows the vehicle . The owner of a vehicle must maintain insurance and that policy is primary . If the limits are reached on the primary policy the non owner policy would kick in and provide excess liability .
If you operate a vehicle in the state of California the vehicle must be insured . You are not required to be the owner of the vehicle because in California insurance follows the vehicle . So in other words if a friend loaned you his or her car that fried is responsible for the insurance on the vehicle . If you did carry your own insurance your insurance would become secondary to the primary vehicles insurance . However , at the end of the day the vehicle must be insured to be operated on the road or you may be subject to stiff penalties . On a side note not all vehicle insurance has permissive driver use . I recommend you always consult with your insurance company to find out what exclusions may apply .
The state of California requires that all licensed drivers have liability insurance . Normally that coverage `` follows '' a vehicle and any licensed driver , other than one specifically excluded , can operate that vehicle with the owner 's permission . Some drivers want to maintain a license even though they no longer own a vehicle in which case they would purchase a liability policy on themselves .
Auto insurance follows the car not the driver or occupant . If your child is unlicensed and operating the car , the provisions of the policy would remain in effect . If your child is an occupant in the car and is hurt in an accident for which the driver of your car is at fault , there can be limited coverage for his medical care . If the driver of the other car is determined to be at fault your childs medical cost will ultimately be paid by the other driver . If your child is struck by a motor vehicle while a pedestrian there can be limited medical coverage .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Many Claims Before Home Insurance Cancels ?
This may differ by state , but here in Michigan the Guideline is 3 claims , over $ 1,500 , non weather related , within 3 years . Some companies may be a little different , but that 's a good baseline . Insurance companies do n't really have problems with weather related claims or big claims . The thing that hurts an insurance company 's bottom line is frequency , not severity .
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
You have significant power to walk away from any insurer . Most states operate with regulations regarding how a cancellation in mid term is treated . Before you leap to canceling your Progressive policy , check with the Insurance department in your state . They will know whether there is a requirement to pro rate the premium or not . Pro rated cancellations are the norm and this is how that works . If you cancel an annual policy for which you paid the whole premium and you cancel at exactly six months , then the company will return to you 50 % of the premium . So , just make sure what the cancellation requirements are in your state .
A homowners policy can be cancelled prior to the completion of the policy term . All coverage ends on the date of cancellation . The company will cancel a policy if the scheduled premium isnt received . It will cancel if you have by fraud , misrepresentation or by omission of fact caused the company to issue a policy that they would not otherwise have issued . They will cancel the policy if there has been a material change in the property that would increase the likelihood of claim . The company is required by law to allow a certain period of time before cancelling the policy . Unused premium is returned according to policy provisions .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
That is a great question ! Yes , you can cancel the contract with the company , and the company can cancel it also . They will cancel the policy if they find that you were dishonest when applying , or failed to make timely payments . You can cancel in writing , or by choosing to no longer make payments . I 'd suggest that you speak with an agent before cancelling your policy , there are some things that you should know before you do . If you would like more detail , please contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
When you buy a home insurance policy , its not a contract for life . If you are unhappy with your current coverage , you can easily switch to a new home insurance company . Before making this move , there are just a few things you need to do beforehand . The first thing you should do is review your current insurance policy . See when it is scheduled to end as well as if there are any costs for ending your contract early . For example , if you cancel a prepaid policy , some companies give you your unearned premium payments back while others will not . Check to see if it makes more financial sense to cancel the policy or just wait for it to expire . When you decide to make a move , you can contact your new insurance company and ask them to set up your new policy . You will need to fill out a short application to set up your coverage . When you submit your application , be sure to include your insurance premium as well . You wont be covered until after the insurance company receives your premium payment . Once your new policy is up and running , you can cancel your old policy . Call up your old company and tell them you want to end your coverage . They will mail you a document telling you your coverage is over and will also return any money they might owe you . After you finish cancelling your policy , you have finished switching home insurance companies .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
As Jerry said , you can cancel a life insurance policy at any time , as long as there is not a court order or contractual agreement for you to keep it . When you cancel a life insurance policy , the coverage is lost and you would have to start over again with being medically underwritten -LRB- or buy a simplified or guaranteed issue nonmed plan -RRB- to get a new policy . The new rates will be at your older age and current health . Be sure that you are approved by this new policy before cancelling an old one , or be sure that you no longer need life insurance before cancelling a policy .
There is no Cooling Off Period for Property & Casualty Insurance ; Cooling Off Period is a safety feature for Life Insurance Products designed to allow the client the freedom to cancel the policy if insurance was purchased following a sales presentation . There have been many cases that people feel that they were pressured into the sale of life insurance product and therefore wish to cancel the policy.Home insurance is written on standardized forms thusregulating the actual coverage offered . Property & Casualty Products , including Home Insurance , are quoted and bound if the client decides to purchase coverage after reviewing the quote . A client may cancel the coverage at any time ; where the insurance company usually has 60 Days -LRB- varies in different States -RRB- to complete their underwriting investigation and take appropriate action . Insurance carriers will not allow the backdating cancellation of a policy unless there is a situation where duplicate insurance exists -LRB- proof will be required -RRB- or if the home has been sold at a prior date -LRB- the closing statement showing the sale date will be required -RRB- . For those seeking an online quotation , there is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
They certainly can ! Of course an insurance company is in business to make money , just like any other business . They will review your policy every year at the renewal to determine if they want to continue to offer coverage at the same price , at a higher or lower price , or at all . If you look like you will be a long term profitable customer over time they will certainly continue coverage -LRB- the price might go up -RRB- , but if you look to be a non-profitable customer over time , they will cancel your policy . Each Insurance company has a different profile they look at before offering renewal . Some things you can do to help if you are worried about being cancelled are : 1 . Do n't file small claims . Insurance is meant to be for catastrophic losses . 2 . Carry a high deductible . Again , Insurance is meant for catastrophic losses . 3 . Insure your Auto , Home and Life with the same company . The more policies they have with you , the greater the chance that you will be a profitable customer to them over time . 4 . Keep a well maintained home . Insurance companies know that detail oriented owners who take care of their property are less likely to have claims , and when they do those claims will be smaller . 5 . Work with your agent to get his advice ! If I can be of any help email me at dbeukel1@amfam.com .
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
Yes . You can cancel your car insurance at any time . The question that you may want to know before cancelling is whether your insurance company pro-rates or short-rates your cancellation . A pro-rated cancellation is more favorable for you since you are charged only for the days that have been used . In Illinois , the insurance companies by law have to pro-rate an auto cancellation .
Yes , you can cancel any insurance at any time ! The carrier may have restrictions on when and under what conditions a policy can be cancelled but an insured has no long term obligation to a policy . Please be cautious before cancelling a policy ; there have been many cases where an insured has cancelled a policy and has been unable to obtain insurance again for a variety of factors . It is a good idea to replace your coverage first unless you 're certain that you do n't want the insurance .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
Homeowners policies are traditionally one year policies . However , if the policy is cancelled , the unused portion of the premium will be returned to you . Most companies cancel policies using a pro rata cancellation . That means that you will get exactly the percentage of the premium as the percentage of the remaining days of the policy . Other companies use a short rate cancellation which will penalize you slightly for cancelling before the end of the policy period .
In Canada , you can cancel you home insurance . There are however ; considerations you should be aware of . here are a couple : If you have a mortgage on your home , the lender usually requires insurance coverage . Home insurance contracts are on a yearly basis and if you cancel before the renewal date there is usually a penalty.There could be more considerations depending on your individual circumstances . You should speak with an independent insurance agent or broker in your local area as laws vary .
The other respondents explain that two basic triggers exist within common liability coverage policies . It is important to realize that most personal insurance - auto , home , motorcycle , rv - are based upon the occurrence trigger in the insurance policy . An occurrence is an event including repeated exposures to the same condition , that cause loss covered by the policy . You 'll understand that if the loss `` occurs '' during the policy period , the loss is coverable and a duty to defend exists until such time as it is determined after further investigation that coverage is not provided by the policy . At that time the carrier would probably extend a `` reservation of rights '' letter to you to notify you that the investigation of the loss events are revealing to the carrier that the loss is not covered for some reason contained within the policy or due to the events that occurred . Nevertheless , if the loss `` occurs '' during the period the policy was effective , and barring exclusions and limitations , their is coverage in an occurrence policy . A `` claims made '' policy changes what triggers the benefits of the policy . In the case of claims made coverage , generally only written on business and professional liability exposures , the trigger is the event and when it occurred . What is different now is that the claims must be first made during the period of coverage or a subsequent policy . If a claim is permitted to be made on subsequent policies , the chain of coverage needs to be uninterrupted and the `` retroactive '' date for coverage to be set to a point before the actual date of the loss . Claims Made policies were designed to help eliminate the chance that years and years of coverage on an occurrence policy could not be stacked one upon the other to generate large amounts of coverage . In the case of claims made policies , only the current policy limit is exposed to loss and not a stack of limits from policies covering prior annual periods . One other point that is necessary to understand . Generally , there are limitations on how long after a policy is cancelled for a claim to be presented . Occurrence policies are much more accommodating here . On the other hand , claims made policies have a limited period of time after the policy ends for a claim to be made . This is referred to as extended discovery and extended discovery on otherwise unendorsed policies is only 60 days . That is , you only have sixty days to present a claim for coverage at the end of a claims made policy . Additional extended periods of discovery are available at additional cost but each carrier may have different periods of discovery available . This feature on a claims made policy provides the `` tail '' of coverage that an occurrence policy includes without additional charge . A `` tail '' is the time beyond the period of coverage where a claim may be first reported or appear on the books of the carrier . Liability type losses can have a long `` tail '' due to the nature of the coverage and potential loss . Property losses , on the other hand , generally have short `` tails '' where the loss is not known . The reserve that the carrier must maintain within its accounting for these losses is not as the IBNR -LRB- incurred but not reported -RRB- loss reserve . Over time the carrier reduces this reserve in recognition that the further past the end of a policy that they travel , the less likely a loss has occurred or will be reported . This should help you understand just how much must taken into account to answer your generalized question . I hope this helps answer your question .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Does It Make Sense To Buy Long Term Care Insurance ?
It makes sense to buy Long Term Care Insurance if you can afford the premium without giving up quality of life . If you are already on Medicaid or have very little income or assets , Medicaid will soon pay for your long term care , if it is needed . You will not have the choices of care that you would by having Long Term Care Insurance , but spending money you do n't have for LTCI premiums , in my opinion , is an unnecessary sacrifice for a need that may never occur .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Long Term Care Insurance makes sense when you have assets that you had hoped to leave to your family , or so that your business could be continued , or for which you had other intentions . Long Term care insurance makes sense if you have a strong desire to make your own choices for your care . In addition to these , it makes sense if you have enough income to pay for it without taking away your quality of life .
Why do I need long term care insurance ? You may not . The choice to purchase long term care is an individual one that depends on what a person wants to protect . If there are assets a person wants to hold onto or even pass along to family , a long term care policy makes great sense . If there is n't that desire , then it makes less sense . The main reason for many insurance purchaese that they create instant money to pay for something needed . Insurance does this so the individual can avoid liquidating other assets .
Long-term care is worth it when 1 . A person is capable of affording to pay the premium for at least a base policy . There is no sense buying a long-term care policy only to have to let it go later because one can not afford it anymore . 2 . Assets that are targeted for moving to the next generation need protection against the high cost ofprolonged end-of-life care . 3 . There is a family history of dementia or Alzheimer 's disease , or other debilitating ailment that might be genetically transmitted . 4 . One does not want to be a financial , emotional , or psychological burden to their spouse or adult children . 5 . Quality of care is an issue . 6 . Staying at home for as long as possible if one becomes chronically ill instead of having to go into a care facility is important . 7 . Adult children are willing to pay premiums for a long-term care policy for their parents . Probability statistics are not entirely reliable because we really do n't know what new medical procedures or accommodations may come along in the future that would change the current situation regarding long-term care . But , the best guess I 've seen justified is that about 1 in 6 will need about 2 years of care to perform daily activities before they die . The cost for that in todays dollars depends on where one lives and how long family members can last taking care of a seriously disabled elderly person before they need skilled help .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
Does the value proposition make sense for long term care insurance which protects extended care risk of assisted living and nursing home care . The average married couple spends $ 250,000 during retirement on medical expenses and extended care . The odds are that you 'll live longer than the preceding generation . If that 's true you need extended care even longer . A non smoking married couple both age 60 will pay around $ 300 a month for $ 7,000 a month benefit totally $ 420,000 . Does that make sense ?
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Whether Long Term Care Insurance is worth the investment depends on how many assets you have to protect . For those who do not have very large estates and who are struggling to make ends meet from month to month , buying Long Term Care Insurance may not make much sense . On the other hand , those who have assets of hundreds of thousands of dollars may find paying a couple hundred of dollars a month for a Long Term Care insurance policy as a good investment . If extended care was needed , their policy would pay for it so that their assets would be safe . The policy would also given them more choices for their care , which some would consider worth the money .
There are Long Term Care products combined with Life Insurance that make sense because if you do n't loose them and perish your beneficiary receives a death benefit ... so it 's not use it or loose it LTC insurance . Unlike traditional Long Term Care -LRB- LTC -RRB- with a life insurance plan your premiums do not go up ... they stay the same . Some plans allow you to have an immediate family member as the caregiver and they would receive the LTC funds . Funds can also be used for home modifications . Did you know that 70 % of claims are for Home Health Care ... not Medical Facility Care ? People want to stay in their own home as long as they can before being moved to a medical home this Life Insurance Long Term Care is a great option . This particular plan I mentioned above does not require you to submit bills . It pays out a specified amount each month regardless of your expenses . This plan is a single lump sum pay , 6 year pay or 10 year pay so you wo n't be stuck paying for life . Also , funds received can be above the allowed HIPPA Cap . Let me know if you would like more information on this Life Insurance Long Term Care plan ... or would like to see rates for your specific age .
Long Term Care Insurance is needed now more than ever . The trend I am seeing is that more companies are coming out with policies that are life insurance based which have a long term care rider attached . One problem with long term care is that people do not realize that they need it until it is too late and they can no longer afford it or qualify for it because of their health . While fewer companies are offering Long Term Care in the traditional sense , Long Term Care Insurance is not going to go away .
when does permanent life insurance make sense ? Permanent life insurance makes great sense if you life too long as term will be long gone at that point in your life . Term covers periods of time when unexpected death `` may '' occur . Permanent covers a life . One type of insurance covers a probability and the other covers a certainty .
It makes sense to buy Long Term Care Insurance if you can afford the premium without giving up quality of life . If you are already on Medicaid or have very little income or assets , Medicaid will soon pay for your long term care , if it is needed . You will not have the choices of care that you would by having Long Term Care Insurance , but spending money you do n't have for LTCI premiums , in my opinion , is an unnecessary sacrifice for a need that may never occur .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Under your current situation I would not carry the old disability policy . Disability insurance is a coordinated product in the sense that any number of policies will not pay more than the maximum scheduled amount usually no greater than 70 % The only reason to carry two different disability insurance policies is if you purchase a short term and a long term disability insurance policy . The long term policy may have an extended elimination period of 90 days or 180 days before benefits commence . A short term disability plan can commence within in days and pay benefits up to the elimination period of the long term plan . What you are describing sounds like two long term disability plan and would not make financial sense to keep the other policy .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
When does whole life make sense ? While I would like to say `` anytime '' , I ca n't . Whole life makes sense when it has time to work . 20 + years and a whole life is an excellent product , probably the best you can do long term . However , when you have limited your time by waiting till later in life to purchase life insurance , the cost of whole life can be prohibitive . Then a GUL -LRB- guaranteed universal life -RRB- starts to make more sense as it can provide lifetime protection at a set stable cost that would be less than Whole life . Whole life still could be a possibility , but usually the cost is up there .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Buy Auto Insurance At The Dealership ?
Great question ! Many years ago I purchased a policy at a dealership in Maryland so that I could drive the car I 'd just bought home . Some dealerships will have an agent that works there , -LRB- usually in the financing department -RRB- but often it is cheaper for you to call your agent , and have the new car added to your policy and emailed or faxed to the dealership while you wait . It can save you a few bucks , and a lot over the long run - like a gas station near the rental car return , they know if you need it , they can charge more , you will spend it . Thanks for asking !
An auto dealership will most likely carry the insurance required to allow test drives . In the event of a loss/accident , the claim would fall back onto the insurance of the dealership . Consequently , if the insurance company is able to prove negligence on behalf of the driver , they may very well turn around and subrogate against the driver for the damages . As for personal auto policies , insurance will travel with the vehicle in most circumstances . If you are a private-seller it would be wise to check with your insurance agent prior to letting anyone drive your vehicle . The wording in auto policies can vary greatly from company to company and it is always best to err on the side of caution when dealing with insurance .
Most insurance companies offer this as an endorsement on to your auto policy . It is MUCH less then buying it from a dealership . Here in Montana the average rate for GAP coverage added to your auto policy is around 7.00 a month Check with your current auto policy and see if it is available
Auto insurance Gap coverage is a physical damage coverage that pays the difference between the loan balance and the actual cash value of the vehicle If it is totaled . This coverage is usually purchased on leased vehicles , but can be purchased on conventionally financed vehicles also . Contact an agent before you purchase the car and coverage to have an idea what the coverage will cost . With that information you can compare at the dealership to decide if want it and if you can get a better price with your agent or the dealership .
Great question ! Many years ago I purchased a policy at a dealership in Maryland so that I could drive the car I 'd just bought home . Some dealerships will have an agent that works there , -LRB- usually in the financing department -RRB- but often it is cheaper for you to call your agent , and have the new car added to your policy and emailed or faxed to the dealership while you wait . It can save you a few bucks , and a lot over the long run - like a gas station near the rental car return , they know if you need it , they can charge more , you will spend it . Thanks for asking !
If your state requires auto insurance , then it is going to be up to the dealership whether or not they wish to take on the risk ofdamage with a person that does not have their own coverage . Even if the dealership lets you test drive the vehicle with out insurance they will more than likely require you to have optained certain coverage limits before driving off with the vehicle . Also if you have a loan on the vehicle the lender will more than likely require a certain level of coverage in order to keep the loan in good standing . Protect yourself , have coverage before test driving a vehicle .
Great question ! Legally , the answer is no . And you really do n't want to , as the penalties for doing so are not worth the trouble . The best thing to do , once you 've decided on the car you want , is to call your agent , and give them the information on the car you are wanting to buy . Have them fax or e-mail the amended or newly issued proof of insurance to the dealership , and drive your car home safely , and legally . Some dealerships will also have an agent on premise , but their policies are probably going to be much more expensive than tour agent would be . Thanks for asking !
J. T. Miller Co , Inc , sells credit life insurance . Pekin Insurance sells credit life insurance through a network of financial institutions and auto dealerships . State Farm sells Mortgage Life Insurance . Credit Unions , financial institutions , and lenders for home mortgages or auto loans are places where credit life insurance can often be purchased .
If your car is considered totaled then a good indicator would go look at NADA > com or Kelly blue book online this would be a close estimate as to what they will give you now if you decided to keep the car you can do that also but you will get less cash for your car from the claim . Another way you can do this is make sure that you know the value of your auto you can call car dealerships and they can tell you what the car was worth prior to the accident . Insurance is to indemnify not to put you ahead . What you think your car is worth may not be as much as an adjuster thinks so be prepared and have a realistic value for your auto . Also if you had optional permanently attached equipment make sure that your policy had that listed or you may not get the value of that included . Hope this helps My best suggestion is to talk to you agent they should be able to help you with determining the value .
Typically when you buy a new vehicle the dealership will require proof of insurance before you leave the lot . That means that you would call your current agent or your auto insurance carrier 's main number and let them know about the purchase of the new vehicle . When you call you should at minimum have the VIN number for the vehicle handy , the carrier will need it to properly identify the vehicle . If you are using this vehicle as a replacement for another you will have to advise your agent or carrier of this .
Auto gap insurance is designed to reimburse you for the difference in the current value of the car and what you owe on the car , in the event there is a total loss . Since a car rapidly depreciates after you make the purchase , it is very possible -LRB- especially with little or no down-payment or trade-in -RRB- , that you will have this `` gap . '' Typically , the cost is not very expensive , and it can be taken out at the time you purchase the vehicle . You can also purchase a gap policy to cover your deductible , which will reduce your out-of-pocket costs . As an experienced car insurance broker , this coverage is often discussed with our customers . You can often buy coverage from your broker , lending institution or dealership .
That 's solely up to the dealership and your lending institution if you have the vehicle financed . I do n't believe that there are any dealerships out there that would be willing to take the risk of a vehicle being damaged or people being hurt by an uninsured motorist out for a test drive .
It is going to be important to be in touch with your Insurance Professional because , as my colleague said , in order to purchase the vehicle , the dealership is going to need proof of insurance on that vehicle in order for them to complete the registration of it for you . You or your dealership will need to provide the year , make , model and Vehicle Identification Number -LRB- VIN -RRB- . Further , if you are leasing or financing , the financial institution needs to be named on your policy and proof provided in order to complete your transaction . If you are financing the purchase , the finance company has an interest abd will need to have proof that you have both Comp and Collision coverage . Leasing is similar , however , in addition to the two physical damage coverages I mentiond , they also require that a certain amount of Liabilitry protection be provided by your policy . Here in CT it is common for the requirement to be $ 100,000 / $ 300,000 or more for Bodily Injury and $ 50,000 or more for Property Damage .
Depending on your carrier there are several ways . To get a rough Idea of the value of your totaled car there are several things you can do before settling for what the carrier is offering . you can check the value of your auto before it was wrecked at nada.com or Kelly blue book . Also you can contact your local car dealership and ask them what your car would of sold for and the value of it prior to the accident .
If you currently have existing auto insurance , most insurance companies have a `` grace '' coverage period before you need to tell your agent or the company you brought a new car . I would check with your agent to see if your policy as this feature . If you do n't have insurance , you should get it before you can drive off into the sun set , or rather off the dealership lot .
There are a few ways to obtain so called `` GAP '' insurance for your car . If you lease the car , in many cases , the dealership builds this coverae into the leasing agreement . It would be important to talk with your Insurance Professional about this as well , however , if your plans are to lease , because in many cases , this coverage can be included in your auto insurance policy and probably for less cost than the same coverage built into your lease agreement .
In most if not all states , auto insurance is required in order to register a car for use on public access roads and highways . So the short answer to your question is right away because you will need to provide an insurance ID card and binder -LRB- if there is financing involved -RRB- to your dealership so that they can complete the transaction and register your car . Be sure to keep your INsurance Professional in the loop when you are shopping for a new car . That is the best way to make sure you have the insurance protection and documentation that you need , at the time you need it .
Most auto dealers will not let you drive the car off of the lot unless you have proof of insurance if there is a loan on the car . It is never a good idea to drive a car without insurance . If you traded a car in , then the coverage on the older car may extend to the new car temporarily , but you need to call your agent as soon as possible and get it changed . Most dealerships have an insurance agent they work with who can get you coverage as well .
The short answer is it can . When buying a used car that has undergone some type of damage , the previous insurance company that paid out the claim will rate the damage on a scale of A - F. Here , D means the vehicle was involved in some type of serious collision . Here is the hypothetical where it could seriously effect your insurance . Lets say you buy a category D car . Lets also say you do not have it inspected by a certified dealership or certified mechanic before the purchase . Lets further assume there is chassis that goes unrecorded by a pre-purchase inspection . Now , while driving your new car you get into an accident and make a claim . The insurance company will take the position that any serious damage was there before you bought the car and a result of the previous accident . However , if we remove the assumption that you did not get an inspection , you can show the inspection to your current insurance company and get all of the damage related to your current accident covered by your claim . I hope this makes sense and helps .
If your vehicle is damaged as a result of negligence by the body shop -LRB- or authorized dealership -RRB- , your auto insurance policy will not provide reimbursement for any out-of-pocket expenses you incur . Your best option is to work directly with the body shop/dealership that did the repair work an attempt to work out am amicable solution agreeable to both parties . Damage to the engine can be potentially very expensive , and perhaps render your vehicle unfit and unsafe to drive . Hiring an attorney may be your next-best recourse if the offending party is uncooperative . Important Note : This answer was provided by Ed Harris , one of the nation 's premier car insurance brokers . Carinsurancezoom.org is the leading US trusted authority for providing the best car insurance rates from top-rated companies .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Everyone Get Medicare At Age 65 ?
Everyone who is a legal resident of the United States and has paid into Medicare taxes for at least 10 years , will get Medicare at age 65 . If the person has not worked outside the home that long , they can get Medicare when they and their qualified spouse turn 65 .
Medicare is available to most people , but not quite everyone . Anyone who has paid Social Security taxes for 40 quarters throughout their working lives are eligible for free Part A Medicare at age 65 , as would their spouse be at age 65 , whether or not they worked outside the home . Disabled persons are eligible for Medicare after two years of receiving Social Security Disability benefits . There are other categories of persons who can get Medicare , including some who can pay for it rather than receive Part A free . But again , not quite everyone in the US can get it .
Everyone who is 65 or older must sign up with Medicare . Medicare is the primary coverage for everyone over age 65 . Every other plan integrates its benefits to Medicare . When it comes time to pay for services Medicare pays first and then passes the bill to a supplemental insurance company or in this case HMO . From the patients viewpoint this is a seamless operation .
Everyone who is a legal resident of the United States and has paid into Medicare taxes for at least 10 years , will get Medicare at age 65 . If the person has not worked outside the home that long , they can get Medicare when they and their qualified spouse turn 65 .
You have to be age 65 to sign up for Medicare , unless you have end stage renal disease or Lou Gherig 's disease -LRB- within parameters set forth by Medicare -RRB- . You will receive Medicare at an age younger than 65 if you have been on Social Security Disability for 24 months and are under age 65 . If you are receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you will be automatically enrolled in Medicare at age 65 .
You normally need to be age 65 to get Medicare . You are automatically enrolled in Medicare at age 65 if you or your spouse has paid Medicare taxes for at least 40 quarters . You can get Medicare under age 65 if you have received Social Security Disability benefits for 24 months , are disabled and have ALS , or have worked for a government job long enough to qualify for Social Security Disability benefits . You might also qualify under age 65 if your partner has died or you are divorced from a partner who qualified for Medicare , or if you have received a kidney transplant or dialysis , in some situations .
That is a great question ! The Medicare system was set up so that everyone could qualify for it , once they turned 65 years of age . There are no restrictions as to your health status - if you are perfectly healthy you qualify , if you have cancer you qualify . The age limitation is pretty solid though . You mentioned that you started taking your Social Security benefits at age 62 , and if you did so because of a disability that required retirement and early benefits , and have been steadily taking those disability benefits since then you may qualify for the early Medicare exemption . To qualify for it , you will have had to have continuously pulled benefits for two years , and you have passed that mark if so . If not , I 'm sorry to say that they are pretty strict about the age requirement , and you will be unable to sign up until you turn 65 . Good luck , and thank you for asking !
-- > Medicare makes it difficult to cancel , or withdraw from , Medicare Part B. Because Medicare Part B provides important coverage for most people 65 and older , and because there 's a penalty if someone cancels Medicare but then later wants to enroll again , Medicare enrolls everyone automatically at age 65 and wants to make sure no one cancels their coverage without fully understanding the consequences .
If you are age 65 when you receive Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare at age 65 . If you are not yet receiving Social Security benefits , you can still sign up for Medicare benefits at age 65 . When relying on your spouse 's eligibility , you can get Medicare at age 65 if your spouse is at least age 62 .
Medicare Benefits are started automatically the first day of the month you turn 65 if you are already getting benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . Youll get your red , white and blue Medicare card in the mail 3 months before your 65th birthday . If youre not getting Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board and youre close to 65 , youll need to sign up . You can contact Social Security 3 months before you turn 65 , the month of your 65 birthday and 3 months after the month you turn 65 . Generally you wont pay a premium for Part A ; Part B will be deducted out of your Social Security Benefits and is based on your income . If you are still covered by your employers insurance you can decline your Part B coverage and save yourself that cost and apply later when your employer coverage ends . Once you have Medicare there are 2 main ways to get your Medicare coverage , there is Original Medicare or Medicare Advantage Plans . To keep thing simple if you chose Original Medicare you must buy a Part D Prescription Drug Coverage and you may also want to purchase Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . One thing to remember is that all Medigap policys with the same letter are identical in coverage the only difference is the price they charge you so shop around with a broker that represents multiple companies . If you chose Medicare Advantage its very similar to employer insurance where you have to see doctors that accept the insurance and there are small co-pays . Most Advantage plans include Medicare prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- and have low and sometimes no monthly premiums .
This debate has been going on for the last century . In theory , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having health insurance ? And , in theory , if everyone was in the insurance risk pool this would be the best way to spread health care costs equally . By the same token , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having good and ample food & water , and everyone needs housing , and everyone needs utilities for their housing , and everyone needs transportation and there is a long list of other needs that we all have . The real question is can a society afford universal health insurance and thus universal health care in the sense that most Americans have become accustomed to getting it ? When you start looking at the economics of health care this becomes much more problematic . Health care is different from most services we consume in that it creates its own growing demand . Who does n't want to live longer , and live healthier during that longer life ? And , as you have probably noticed , we have a continually growing list of parts we can replace , once deadly illnesses we can now manage or cure , and treatments that just improve your `` quality of life '' . All this comes with a price tag and the price just keeps going up . I was born in 1957 for a cost of $ 400 , my son was born in 1987 for a cost of $ 4000 , and today a normal childbirth is easily $ 8000 + . As best as I can tell , babies are born the same way today as they were in 1957 but the cost has far outpaced general inflation levels in the economy as a whole over that time period . The painful reality is that providing universal healthcare in a modern society -LRB- e , g , - North America , Europe -RRB- has not been accomplished without rationing of healthcare services -LRB- however it might be disguised -RRB- . For instance , we have more MRI scanners in Memphis , TN than in all of Canada -LRB- a nation often cited as an example of where universal health insurance is a success -RRB- . Tests that get ordered and conducted on the same day here can have waiting times of months up there . There really is no definitive answer to your question . But it does highlight the gap between theory and reality when trying to address providing health insurance to a population .
It is possible to get Medicare before age 65 in some circumstances . Unfortunately , opting to take Social Security benefits before age 65 does NOT entitle you to Medicare benefits . Likewise , if your spouse is under age 65 when you retire , they are not eligible for Medicare until they turn age 65 . An alternate form of medical insurance must be secured for the interim , in those situations . Medicare can be obtained before age 65 if the patient has End Stage Renal Disease or ALS , within parameters . Persons who are on Social Security Disability for two years can also receive Medicare under age 65 .
You can start on Medicare when you are age 65 . If you have paid into Social Security taxes at least 10 years , or are the dependent of a spouse who has done so , you can get Medicare Part A for free . If you were on Social Security Disability for 24 months , you can get Medicare if you are younger than age 65 . Some other ways to get Medicare at an age younger than 65 is if you have end stage renal disease or ALS .
Financial ratings really do n't matter when it comes to Medicare supplement insurance . All Medicare supplement plans are identical , and all pay claims on a timely basis . There are considerable consumer protections included in Medicare supplement plans . If your Medicare supplement carrier gets in financial trouble or decides to exit the market you have a `` free pass '' to apply for any plan with any other carrier , regardless of your health . The best Medicare supplemental insurance plan in your state is one that matches your needs and budget . Medigap insurance rates vary considerably by zip code , age , tobacco use and plan . The older you are the higher your Medicare supplement rate will be . The exception is for those who are under age 65 and on disability and Medicare . In most states rates for under age 65 are astronomical . Many carriers offer competitive rates from age 65 to 74 . Above age 74 some plans -LRB- surprisingly -RRB- become more competitive while others less so . Tobacco use often adds 20 % to the rate but can be more , depending on the carrier . Plan F is the most expensive -LRB- and most popular -RRB- followed by D or G -LRB- depending on your state -RRB- , N then Hi F which is the least expensive . You can generally find a site that offers `` instant Medigap quotes '' but keep in mind the most competitive rates are usually not illustrated online . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans #GaMedigapQuotes
Generally , you are eligible for Medicare if you or your spouse worked for at least 10 years in Medicare-covered employment and you are 65 years or older and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States . If you arent yet 65 , you might also qualify for coverage if you have a disability or with End-Stage Renal disease -LRB- permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or transplant -RRB- . Here are some simple guidelines . You can get Part A at age 65 without having to pay premiums if : You already get retirement benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . You are eligible to get Social Security or Railroad benefits but have n't yet filed for them . You or your spouse had Medicare-covered government employment . If you are under 65 , you can get Part A without having to pay premiums if you have : Received Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board disability benefits for 24 months . End-Stage Renal Disease and meet certain requirements . While you do not have to pay a premium for Part A if you meet one of these conditions , you must pay for Part B if you want it . The Part B monthly premium in 2013 is $ 104.90 per month . It is deducted from your Social Security , Railroad Retirement , or Civil Service Retirement check . If you dont get any of the above payments , Medicare sends you a bill for your Part B premium every 3 months . Note : You will be eligible for Medicare when you turn 65 even if you are not eligible for Social Security retirement benefits .
If you are receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you will be automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Medicare Part B at age 65 . If you are not yet retired and are not receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you must enroll for Medicare on your own . The best time to do it is three months before turning age 65 .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
In order for someone to receive Medicare you need to be disable orage 65 . You will need to be disable for 2 years to receive Medicare . At age 65 you willbe eligible to apply forMedicare 3 months before you turn age 65 the month of your birthday and 3 monthsafter your birthday . Once you apply for Medicare you will need to apply for additional health 20 % that Original Medicare does not coverage . Original Medicare only coverage 's 80 % of you Medicare bills . You will have the options to apply for a Part C plan Medicare Advantage , Part D planmany plansor a Medicare Supplement plan . For more information contact Agent Ms. Best at 1866-491-1491 .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
People typically go on Medicare Part A & B when they turn age 65 . From there , they decide on getting a Medicare Supplement or a Medicare Advantage plan to cover what Medicare Part A & B does not cover . If you are on a group plan from an employer you may be able to delay getting Part B until you retire . Some folks can go on to Medicare before age 65 if they have certain health issues .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Why Is Auto Insurance Important To Have ?
Auto insurance is important to have since it protects yourself , family members , passengers , and pedestrians in theeventof an accident involving any damage . Of course , your vehicle is also protected , as is the bank who may be financing your vehicle . You do n't have to carry auto insurance . Simply do n't drive a vehicle and it will be one less worry in your life ! I could n't do it though .
In addition to losing your license and visiting your local jail , you could subject yourself to financial ruin by not carrying auto insurance . The primary purpose of auto insurance is to protect yourself and others in the event of an accident . The vehicle itself should really be the least of your concerns . Dependent upon the circumstances , auto insurance could provide you coverage for injuries sustained by you . your passengers and others involved in the accident . Additionally , auto insurance could provide you with legal defense in the event you are sued . These are only some of the consequences you could face by not carrying adequate auto insurance . That 's why it is important to have an agent you can trust where you can sit down to discuss how to best protect yourself .
I assume that you mean failed as in `` did not pay what it guaranteed '' . Annuities are backed by the claims paying ability of the Insurance company that issued the policy . This is why it is very important to consider the financial rating of the company you use . Since 2008 , there have only been 3 `` B '' rated insurance companies that have failed . There have been more C , D , & E rated companies that have failed , but not many . And most of the ones that did were D rated or worse . Since 2008 there have been no B + or better companies that have failed . -LRB- Actually its longer than that , but the records I currently have access to only go back that far . But I am not personally aware of any insurance companies that were A rated at time of failure -RRB- This is why most agents recommend using a B + , or better yet , an A rated company . It is also important to point out that just because an insurance company fails , does not mean the annuity fails to pay . Insurance companies are highly regulated . And the states all have a safety net type system set up to help secure the guarantees made by failing insurance companies . Visit WEBSITELINK for more info on what happens in the event of an insolvency . But it is important to remember that whatever safety net might exist . It is no substitute for a solid financial rating . There are way too many well rated companies to use a poorly rated one .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
While of the `` unearned '' premium should be returned when you cancel your car insurance , it would be important to know why you are cancelling your car insurance.If there are no other cars in your household and you are not considered an insured on another comparable auto insurance policy , you may wish to consider `` Non-owned Auto '' coverage . This type of policy covers you for liability and physical damage while you are operating a car you do not own -LRB- borrowed , rented , etc. -RRB- and may provide uninsured/underinsured coverage to you when you are a pedestrian or riding in someone else 's vehicle . Not owning a car does not mean you no longer have an auto related exposure .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
You can not sue someone for not having auto insurance . You can sue a person if the persons or party caused bodily injury and/or property damage to you . Auto insurance would normally cover the persons or party in this situation which is why you would carry auto insurance in the first place . However if the persons or party does not have the coverage you may take them to court to seek restitution . But you can not sue the persons or party just for not having auto insurance .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The lowest auto insurance rates are easily found when you work with an experienced broker and their website . Why ? It 's important to check multiple companies , and receive unbiased advice from someone with at least 20 years in the business . Whether you have a great driving record or are considered a high-risk , you 'll save money . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier Auto Insurance Broker for last 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
Why is whole life good ? Well there have been several answers that will cover the bases pretty well . A locked in premium , tax deferred growth , a death benefit that grows over time , etc. . Let me give you another reason . a reason that you may not realize until later in life if something happens to you but does n't kill you . That 's right people get sick . Diabetes , high blood pressure , heart problems and so on can and actually do happen to a large segment of our population . The reason I want to point out pertains to the things I just mentioned . Why is whole life good ? Because they ca n't take it away from you . YOU control the policy . The price ca n't go up , the policy ca n't really run out of years and end prematurely . Why is that important ? When I got sick with my type II , hyper tension and recently AFIB , what a reassurance it was to KNOW I was still in control of my policies , that they were n't going to end or explode in price on me . Whole life is expensive because it 's a product the INSURED controls . Cheers .
The only way to answer this is to look at your situation and determine why you should consider having Life Insurance . Here are some examples why you would consider having a Life Insurance . you are married . A life policy would pay off any expenses and help to maintain the standard of living you currently have or perhaps want to provide the means to improve the living standard . you have children . This is a common reason . Have coverage to support your spouse until the kids move out . Perhaps you want to make sure the children have the means to go to college if you were to die prematurely . your a partner owning a business . Life Insurance is used for Key Person & Buy-Sell agreements . Key Person pays the company for lost income if a Key -LRB- important -RRB- employee passes while the company looks for someone to replace you . Buy-Sell purchases the ownership of your partners half that would otherwise fall to the family , surviving spouse . you have a bank loan . Sometimes , depending on the structure of a loan , you might be required to have Life Insurance which would pay the loan back upon your untimely death . This is one way a bank may minimize the risk on the loan defaulting . There are just 4 examples which are common . There are many other situations where it is good to have Life Insurance . Contact your agent/broker to discuss your situation .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Depending on your states laws . They have to give you 45 day notice in Montana and the can if you fraudulently put information on your application they can there are many reasons why they can . In many cases they Non renew you When you get an auto policy in most states it clearly states that you must list all drivers that regularly dive your auto and if you do n't then that is fraud and they can also use that to cancel on a Home if there is more of a risk then it is possible or 2 many claims there numerous factors that would apply contact a local agent and find out why there are many things that they can do to prevent this from happening
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Companies make money from life insurance premiums . If the number of death claims causes the life insurance company to pay out more than is brought in , the company needs to go into reserves to pay claims . That is why it is so important for life insurance companies to be financially sound , and it is also why underwriting for a life insurance policy usually requires an exam . The life insurance company is protecting itself , and its policyholders , by assessing risk accurately .
It is the single most important form of insurance and everyone regardless of single , married , kids , age , etc should have it . Think of it like this . You have auto insurance to protect a car , home insurance for a home , etc , but why would anyone not protect the only thing you really own and the loved ones that care about you with life insurance ? You can easily replace a car or a home with another , but how do you replace a life and the financial burden placed on the ones you love ? Life insurance allows you to do that and if you do n't have it I recommend contacting your local independent agent .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
When Does Short Term Disability Insurance Start ?
Short Term Disability benefits can start as soon as 1 day after the injury or illness is incurred . If provided through the employer , sick days or vacation may be applied toward time off before the payment of Short Term Disability benefits . If a private policy , you have a choice of how many days to make the elimination period , and that will determine when benefits begin to be paid .
When does short term disability start ? Well it 's going to depend on the provisions of your policy . Some may have 1st accident and a different elimination period for illness . In most cases you can select your start dates , realizing that a smaller number of days before the policy kicks in , the greater the premium price .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
No these are two totally separate types of insurance plans used to cover totally different needs . Disability insurance can be either long term or short term . Long term disability is used to replace your income for the rest of your working life . It usually has a bit longer elimination period 90-180-360 days before benefits begin to pay . The benefits can pay as long as age 67 when social security benefits start . A short term disability insurance plan pays benefits sooner within days , but only lasts a few months or up to a couple of years . Both disability insurance plans are insuring most peoples most valuable asset , their ability to earn a living . Disability insurance should be purchased when a person starts working for a living . Long term care insurance is meant to cover a person that can no longer care for themselves . The person needs home health care , assisted living or a nursing home . Usually the time to purchase a long term care policy is when a person gets older , typically in their 50s or 60s , but some wait until their 70s . It really depends more upon their health and lifestyle . Just do n't wait until you have been diagnosed with an affliction , then is too late .
There are online outlets for short term disability but before you start shopping for short term disability insurance , find out if your employer sponsored group plan offers it . Many of these types of plans offer short term disability insurance as part of the overall employee benefits.But if you have to shop , start online with brokerage outlets that specialize or have complete departments dedicated to disability insurance . Most of these firms have access to a wide range of carriers that can spread sheet the players in disability insurance .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Short term disability insurance pays a percentage of your salary for a specified amount of time if you are ill or injured and can not perform the duties of your occupation . Please note , you may be required to use up your sick days -LRB- if applicable -RRB- before your short term disability coverage will start making payments . If you have short term coverage , you may want to consider supplementing it with long termdisabilityinsurance as many people who need to use their short term disability coverage will often be unable to work for longer than the short term plan allows . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your disability insurance program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
Short term disability insurance is paycheck protection in case of a disability event . And many consumers can only afford short term disability versus long term disability coverage . Mutual of Omaha is a major carrier in short term disability insurance . Keep in mind that you may have short term disability insurance through your employers group benefit plan . You also have Social Security disability insurance , although benefits may be limited .
There is a huge inventory of disability insurance companies that carry short term disability and some short term disability group plans for business . Before purchasing short term disability insurance , make sure your employer does n't offer it . Here are a few on short term disability companies that come to mind Mutual of Omaha , Aflac , Lincoln Financial Group .
Short Term disability Insurance pays a percentage of your salary if you become temporarily disabled , meaning that you are not able to work for a short period of time due to a sickness or injury -LRB- excluding on-the-job-injuries , which are covered by workers compensation insurance -RRB- . A typical short-term disability insurance policy provides you with 40 to 65 percent of your pre-disability base salary , according to the Life and Health Insurance Foundation for Education . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners estimates that these benefits generally last between three to six months . Most short-term disability insurance policies have a `` cap '' , meaning you receive a maximum benefit amount per month . Short-term disability insurance policies also have a limit on the amount of times that you can receive benefits-up to two years , according to the Insurance Information Institute . .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
Before you start shopping for short term disability insurance , find out if your employer sponsored group plan offers it . Many of these types of plans offer short term disability insurance as part of the overall employee benefits.But if you have to shop , start online with brokerage outlets that specialize or have complete departments dedicated to disability insurance . Most of these firms have access to a wide range of carriers that can spread sheet the players in disability insurance .
You can use Group Short Term Disability Insurance for maternity leave . This is only available though employers who offer it . Some states mandate that employers offer Group Short Term Disability , but most do not mandate it . Unfortunately , private Short Term Disability can only be used for complications of pregnancy . Long Term Disability does pick up when complications cause loss of work beyond the policy 's elimination period .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Disability insurance is offered as short term disability , generally two years , and long term disability , generally to age 65 . The elimination or waiting period needs to be established on the basis of your cash reserves . And keep in mind that many employer sponsored group plans include short term disability coverage . Having short term disability coverage may allow you to purchase long term disability coverage with a longer elimination period .
Short Term Disability Insurance pays cash to persons who are temporarily unable to perform their jobs . Benefits can start as soon as day one , or you can choose a longer elimination period -LRB- up to several months -RRB- to lower your premium . You can choose a benefit period of months to years , with two years being the longest most Short Term Disability Insurance can last . People who have enough savings to tide them over if they are unable to work for several months , do not need Short Term Disability Insurance . However , if you are offered it at a low price , it could certainly be worth having . Those who need it at nearly any cost are those who could not survive even a month without their paycheck . Long Term Disability Insurance is the policy that kicks in after being off of work for several months , and can last many years . This is the type of coverage most people purchase if they are not offered Disability Insurance through their employment .
Before shopping for short term disability insurance , first determine if your employer 's group benefit plan offers it . If your an executive or key person in the company , you may ask for short term disability insurance to be added to your compensation package . Short term disability benefits usually is designed for two years . Short term disability is paycheck protection against illness or injury recovery .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Do I Contact Medicare ?
To contact Medicare , you can call 1-800-MEDICARE -LRB- 1-800-633-4227 -RRB- . The TTY phone number is 1-877-486-2048 . Or you can write Medicare atCenters for Medicare & Medicaid Services ,7500 Security Boulevard , Baltimore , Maryland 21244-1850 .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
As a big do it yourselfer , the answer is maybe ? It depends on what your situation is and how adept you are on gathering information and making a good decision from all the information out there . I mean I like to work on my cars and trucks . I can do many things myself and feel really good about it . However , I do still use my trusted mechanic for the things I simply am not good enough to do myself and that way I avoid putting my family at risk . As another noted , there are absolutely no price savings in going without an agent . The laws in most states prevent any discounting for doing it yourself . It never ever hurts to become informed about a product . I have taught my son the doctor , how to frame a house , wire a house and have a general understanding about construction . He 's a doctor now , and yes , that is fun to say , he has learned enough about how to build that when he decides to build , he can have a good conversation with a builder and know when to call shenanigans or not . By all means it pays to educate yourself , but understand that an open mind is required to educate yourself .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
If you 're enrolled in Medicare , you should have a red , white , and blue Medicare ID card that will cite whether you have Medicare Part A and/or Medicare Part B -LRB- as well as the effective dates for those coverage -RRB- . If you 're not sure where the ID card is or if you have even enrolled in Medicare , you can always contact Medicare directly to find out the information . If you purchased a Medigap plan and/or a standalone Part D prescription drug plan -LRB- PDP -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- , or Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug plan -LRB- MAPD -RRB- , but are unsure what plan you have or need information regarding the plan 's benefits , you would need to contact the agent you purchased the plan -LRB- s -RRB- through or contact the carrier directly for the input . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
To clarify your question - are you asking for a statistical figure as to how many specific claims were made for chiropractic services ? Or are you asking if chiropractic services are covered by Medicare ? If you 're looking for statistical data , I would suggest contacting CMS -LRB- the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- or Medicare for help determining that figure - insurance agents would be very unlikely to have that data available for a specific type of claim on hand -LRB- I myself do not -RRB- . If you 're looking for input regarding if chiropractic services can be covered by Medicare , then the answer would be it depends . Medicare part B may cover some chiropractic services if they are deemed medically necessary to correct a subluxation in the spine . If it 's not deemed medically necessary , then it would n't be covered . If you have a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as a Medicare Supplement plan -RRB- , the plan would only pay their portion of services if Medicare approves the claim . If Medicare does n't approve it , then the Medigap plan wo n't be able to approve the charge . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can I Get Disability Insurance In California If I 'm Pregnant ?
If you are pregnant , it is usually impossible to purchase Disability Insurance that will cover your pregnancy , in California or any other state . Sometimes you can purchase Disability Insurance that will exclude your current pregnancy . California does have government sponsored DI for persons not working for the State , but again , you must get it before you are pregnant .
There is a pretty good chance that you already have coverage through the state . Private workers are automatically enrolled in the program . Check your pay stubs to see if deductions for SDI -LRB- State Disability Insurance -RRB- have been withheld . If so contact the Employment Development Division for help in filing your claim .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
If you are pregnant , it is usually impossible to purchase Disability Insurance that will cover your pregnancy , in California or any other state . Sometimes you can purchase Disability Insurance that will exclude your current pregnancy . California does have government sponsored DI for persons not working for the State , but again , you must get it before you are pregnant .
That is a great question ! Generally , once you are pregnant , it is too late to purchase a disability policy . It 's kind of like trying to get an auto insurance policy after you 've wrecked the car , the insurance company knows they will have to pay out , and are reluctant to sell you a policy , knowing they are going to take a loss . Unfortunately , unlike health insurance , with disability insurance the pre-existing condition exclusion will apply . I 'm sorry . Thank you though , for asking !
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from InsuranceLibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is term life insurance better than permanent life insurance ? '' Well , did you hear the two words in there ? One is term and one is permanent . When I 'm looking at term insurance , I 'm looking at obligations . I 'm looking at liabilities that I may that are temporal that they are not forever . And so I 'm going to look at term insurance to cover those ideas , those indemnification needs , and if I have permanent needs them I 'm going have to look at different forms of life insurance that are permanent . It could be Par Whole Life . It could Current Assumption UL . It could be Indexed Universal Life . It could be Variable Life , depending upon what my propensity for risks are , but I 'm always looking , is this a temporary expense reimbursement ? Or is this a permanent need that will never go away ? It 's never not is term insurance better or worse than permanent ? It 's the issue of the need . Well , that 's our consumer question for the day . If you have any questions just submit them to www.InsuranceLibrary.com .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Can you get disability insurance while pregnant ? Yes , you can . Will they cover the pregnancy and any complications with ? NOPE . Disability policies carry a pre-existing condition clause that allows them to turn down a claim for a condition that occurs prior to the application . So you could get a disability policy while pregnant , but everything connected to the pregnancy would not be covered .
Can you get disability insurance if you are already pregnant ? Yes , but not for the pregnancy . It is possible to get disability insurance while pregnant , but disability insurance plans use a pre-existing condition clause in the policy to prevent a person from going on immediate claim when they purchase the policy .
This is a very common question and the answer is that it depends on the carrier and its definition of total disability . Normal pregnancy is not considered a disability by some carriers . In fact , it is clearly excluded from coverage in the contract . For others , as long as it falls into their definition of what constitutes a total disability , they will replace income after the elimination period is satisfied . The definition of disability is key . A typical definitionmight be something like `` the inability to perform the usual and customary duties of the occupation -LRB- job -RRB- in which the insured is working at the beginning of a disabling event ... '' A less favorable definition would add the words , `` and is unable to work in any other occupation . '' Since many women are able to performthe primary duties of their occupation during the first two trimesters of a normal pregnancy , some carriers do not automatically consider a leave for pregnancy a trigger point to replace income . And , if they do , 90 days is a typical elimination period - a kind of `` time deductible '' before one qualifies for benefits - most women would probably not satisfy the elimination period before the baby was born anyway . If there were complications resulting from pregnancy , then that 's a whole different situation , and if they started to occur early enough in the pregnancy and did qualify under the definition of disability , the elimination period would theoretically start sooner and benefits might be paid out before birth . If you are beginning a new job and think you might become pregnant or intend to become pregnant during the time you are employed with that company , be sure to ask Human Resources if the company provides disability insurance as a group benefit and if the coverage includes normal pregnancy .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
Since disability insurance pays for time off for pregnancy and childbirth , being pregnant is considered a pre-existing condition and you can not usually apply for disability insurance while pregnant . In my experience , the application is postponed until after the baby is born , but you might be able to modify the policy to exclude pregnancy related disability so that you can go forward with the application .
You can not get a short term disability policy that will pay for time off for a normal pregnancy and delivery , once you are already pregnant . If you got the short term disability insurance policy before becoming pregnant , they can receive benefits from that policy when you delivery your baby .
Yes , unfortunately , pregnancy is a pre-existing condition for disability insurance if you apply while pregnant . If you applied before becoming pregnant , obviously , then the pregnancy would not be a pre-existing condition . However , some polices may require that you apply several months before you become pregnant in order to qualify .
No , pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition , and you can not get maternity disability insurance while pregnant . There may be an exception somewhere , but it is highly doubtful . Even most group plans require that you have worked at the business before becoming pregnant in order to use disability benefits for normal pregnancy .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is buying term and investing the difference better than cash value life insurance ? '' Well , when I 'm looking at buying term and investing the difference , what am I investing it in ? And is that a risk area ? And if I 'm looking at permanent insurance , am I looking at guarantees and guaranteed returns ? Am I looking at using indexing ? Am I looking at risk-based insurance , like variable ? When I put those two together , I want to look at both of those plans and to see which one comes out the best . We have programs that we 've developed that will measure , is it better to buy term insurance and invest the difference in whatever product line you want to think of , whether it 's mutual funds or ETF 's . Or is it better to keep it inside a contract for the tax deferral and the possible tax-free income ? You can compare those things and always know which way to go with a simple program that will measure it for you . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
I am not aware of any carrier that will issue a life insurance policy to a pregnant female . There are many risk factors to consider which make it impossible to properly price the risk of a life insurance policy on a woman that is pregnant . Every carrier I am aware of will not consider an application until the pregnancy has ended and the woman has been released from her doctor 's care .
If you were to purchase a short term disability policy while being four months pregnant , there will almost certainly be an exclusion on your policy that will exclude payment if time is taken off for any reason related to pregnancy or childbirth . If you had long term disability in place when you got pregnant , it should pay for bed rest due to complications during your 8th month of pregnancy . Congratulations and best wishes .
Yes , there are some companies that require medical underwriting that will allow a pregnant woman to apply in her first two trimesters . There are some No Exam companies that will allow a woman to apply while pregnant in any trimester . You must be within the policy 's weight guidelines and not be experiencing complications due to pregnancy in order to obtain a policy while pregnant , unless the policy has very few health questions -LRB- simplified or guaranteed issue -RRB- , in which case those things might not matter .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Do I Cancel My Car Insurance With Geico ?
In order to cancel your auto insurance you would simply need to call Geico and let them know of your intent to cancel . Geico then will advise you as to what is needed in order to complete the cancellation of your policy . In most cases it would be a simple written request dated and signed requesting termination of the policy .
Let me share my experience.I 'm a licensed fee-based -LRB- accept no commissions -RRB- insurance consultant who has studied insurance , obtained a number of industry designations , owned and operated a general insurance agency for nearly forty years and helped thousands of insurance consumers with their insurance questions . I have long harbored ill will toward GEICO and other insurers who chose not to do business with independent agents . I believe their sales staff -LRB- and that of other insurers selling direct to the public -RRB- are trained to sell what the insurer wants to sell ; not what the consumer really needs . But I recently sought to purchase auto insurance for myself and checked out a number of on-line insurance offerings . GEICO 's premiums were one third of those indicated by E-surance , Progressive , and several others . The application process and live discussion with a sales person was cordial , professional and non-threatening . I was able to access my coverage information on-line , pay premiums directly and obtain insurance cards.Actually my experience was better than any I 've had with any independent agent . My conclusion , it is still important to know what you need and want . It is you against a large insurer and that means be cautious . But for my money I certainly would consider GEICO as an insurer.If nothing else they deserve a look .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
In order to cancel your auto insurance you would simply need to call Geico and let them know of your intent to cancel . Geico then will advise you as to what is needed in order to complete the cancellation of your policy . In most cases it would be a simple written request dated and signed requesting termination of the policy .
In answer to your question here , unless someone has knowledge to the contrary , Geico backs Geico homeowner policies . Even though Geico is a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway , the Company of which Mr. Warren Buffett is Chairman , the Geico Corporation is licensed to do business in all States and would pay claims under the Geico name .
Geico does not actually insure Renters or Homeowners . Geico partners with other insurance companies like Travelers and ASI who provide the insurance . Geico claims to cut out the middle man but that 's simply not true . Geico is an independent agency just like every local agency in your community . Geico just spends a tremendous amount of money to convince the public they are the cheapest and the best . It 's simple not true .
Geico is really two entities . One is the insurance company that provides auto and vehicle coverage . The other is the Geico insurance agency . They are simply like any other independent agency in that they represent other companies through which they place insurance . This is what Geico does with life insurance . If you purchase life insurance with them , it will be placed with a different company . That does n't necessarily make it bad . It 's most likely a company that many independents write through . My advice is to find the right agent . One you can trust to do the best thing for you and your family , not just the cheapest option . Then listen to him/her and take their advice . You 'll come out ahead in the long run .
Geico themselves does not offer life insurance policies - the coverage programs secured through the Geico agency are written through non-affiliated insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Genworth , Aviva , Transamerica , MetLife , etc. -RRB- . If you try to run a quote on Geico 's website , you are re-directed to another quoting site that Geico does not own . There 's numerous insurance companies out there . I would recommend working with an independent agent so you can see a wider range of options that are available to you . If you have any other questions or would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Geico does not sell life insurance originated within their own company . If you attempt to get a life insurance quote from Geico 's website it will take you to another agency . Geico says on their website that life insurance policies are written through non affiliated companies and secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. .
Geico offers Term Life Insurance through non-affiliated insurance companies . In other words , the life insurance is not underwritten by Geico ; Geico just helps you get it by referring you to a brokerage that carries quotes from multiple life insurance companies . The agency they refer you to is not owned by Geico .
There is no such thing as best car insurance in any state let alone Massachusetts . You may to need to qualify your meaning of best car insurance . Do mean best in lower rates , good service , best claims service ? There are few really bad insurance companies . The all come under state regulation are required certain level of ethics and behavior . It is true that you may encounter different experience as you engage any insurance company . That encounter may cement your opining about that company . Geico rates are going up because of a dismal first quarter profits . You opinion of Geico may change because they were once cheap and now they are expensive . What do really mean by best insurance company in Mass ?
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does Geico have life insurance ? Most of you know that Geico is a property casualty insurance company , and of course they have the gecko as their advertising mascot . They outsource all their life insurance applications off their web to an outside vendor , so they do n't really manufacture term life insurance nor do the manufacture permanent life insurance . So when you 're looking for life insurance and you 're one of their actual policy holders in property casualty , a lot of times you 'll stay within that agency and you 'll go ahead and purchase other insurances like life insurance . If you 're looking for life insurance , you may want to also look online at different brokerage houses to see if their price tags are any better than what Geico is offering .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Geico does not write Homeowners insurance . If you have your Auto insurance with Geico , they will typically offer you a Homeowners quote through Geico General Agency and the insurance company they use is Travelers Ins . Co. . They do this so that you can receive a Multi-policy discount . I hope this answered your question .
Geico does not write Renters in their name they are written throw other companies they send it out to . I remember one company was Assurant . They are a great company i had my Renters with them at one time . You should contact Geico directly where they can fully explain who would be covering you in case of any loss and any other questions you may be have . Good Luck . Thanks .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Geico acts as both an insurance company and an insurance agency for other insurance carriers . Although Geico is known for their Direct Auto Insurance Policies , Geico Home Insurance is offered by Stillwater Insurance Group . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Geico life insurance is written through non-affiliated life insurance companies and is secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. . Therefore , Geico offers life insurance from a number of different life insurance companies at a variety of prices . You can get free life insurance quotes from any number of websites . By choosing one that gives `` instant '' quotes you will get your rates without having to talk to anyone .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Does Car Insurance Group 16 Mean ?
Group 16 is a classification of vehicles -LRB- mostly used in Europe -RRB- that are used to distinguish risk from other groups . For example , a Fiat 500 C and a Ford Fiesta are typically found in that group . If you live here in the US and will not be visiting Europe , it will not impact you .
There is no pat answer to that question . Soooooooooo many variables . If a 16 year old strikes out on his own to purchase car insurance for a so-called sports car , he will likely pay tremendously more than a 16 year old who insures a sports car or any car for that matter , with the same company as the other household drivers and cars are insured with . In addition there are the myriad of other factors that weigh into the rate , i.e. the specific car , policy coverage limits , driving record , credit , homeownership , etc , etc. . Call an insurance professional for guidance .
Assuming you mean price , the life insurance spreadsheets from the brokerage community are an excellent starting place to explore the life insurance company that best suits your financial profile , risk tolerance and economic goals . The spreadsheets are divided into two macro categories : Term Life Insurance and Permanent Life Insurance . Term Life Insurance is separated into guaranteed coverage periods 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years with health classifications for standard and better -LRB- 5 -RRB- as well as substandard ratings -LRB- 16 -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is divided into indemnification , income and inheritance planning goals -LRB- single life and survivorship policies -RRB- with health classifications for standard and better -LRB- 5 -RRB- as well as substandard ratings -LRB- 16 -RRB- . There is no one life insurance company that dominates any of these categories and subsets , but we monitor these areas diligently to keep consumers apprised of which life insurance companies rank the best
Here in CT , one must be at least 16 years of age in order to obtain a drivers license . A 15 year old has the opportunity to obtain a learners ' permit within the regulations of the Department of Motor Vehicles , but does not have to be listed as a driver on the parent 's policy . Other states may be different . Once a young driver receives his or her license , then they need to be listed on their parent 's auto policy as a regular driver in their home with access to their vehicles . If the 16 year old purchases a car of their own and wishes to register in in their own name , then they will need to obtain their own separate auto policy in order to accomplish that . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the laws in your state and the best options available for both you and your young driver .
Group 16 is a classification of vehicles -LRB- mostly used in Europe -RRB- that are used to distinguish risk from other groups . For example , a Fiat 500 C and a Ford Fiesta are typically found in that group . If you live here in the US and will not be visiting Europe , it will not impact you .
Entering business without appropriate liability insurance can result in financial consequences that will dwarf the premium that would be required to have coverage . Just because he is 16 years old will not relieve him of the financial responsibility in the event of an occurrence where someone is injured or property is damaged . I do n't buy into the notion that insurance gives a business credibility but I do agree that it is the best single method of protecting assets and the future ability to earn a living . At 16 years old , another issue develops and that is whether or not he meets legal requirements to start or open a business or can entered into contracts . And , because your son is not of a legal age , will his parents or legal guardian be responsible for any losses that occur in the operation of the business ? If a case can be made for the inclusion of parents or guardians into a claim or lawsuit , the stakes just went up dramatically . So , insurance is a minimum necessity . One other thought . Insurance carriers may not insure your son because of his age , but they are more likely to concern themselves with the combination of his age and lack of business experience . Many carriers having the best rates have the requirement of at least a few years of experience . While coverage may be available in a specialty insurance marketplace , our best carriers will generally have issues with a 16 year old new business customer first entering and insuring a business . Once again , a parent might be necessary to make the business insurance happen . But back to your question : Absolutely a yes on the need for insurance . Good luck .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
The answer to this question depends on the State where the insurance is written . The Department of Insurance in each State has regulations which differ . In the State of California , Auto Insurance risk assessment is not permitted by age but rather by years of driving experience . For the most part , if a driver becomes licensed at 16 years of age , then he/she would have attained 9 years of driving experience at age 25 . For a quote , please feel free to utilize the link below : WEBSITELINK For many years , when speaking of risk in Auto Insurance , we would refer to the frightening image of a 16 Year Old Male Driver with a Ford Mustang GT -LRB- or other muscle car -RRB- driving around in a wreckless manner ! The industry tamed the image by simply asking for ` years of experience ' to be the assessment factor in most States in the early 1990s .
That is a great question ! In most cases , the answer will lie in your company 's policies , your driving record , and where you live . The most risky age group for insurers is that 16-25 year old group , and as a result , the rate increases and decreases can vary quite a bit . Your best bet ? Call your agent and ask . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
If you are 16 and have a car titled exclusively in your name in Connecticut , then you will actually be required to obtain your own car insurance i order to register that car for use on public roads and highways . Check with your parent 's Insurance Professional first because their insurance company may offer better coverage at a more reasonable rate due to multi policy discounts .
Normally no life insurance proceeds would not be taxed , however Washington state does have a state estate tax . The exemption is $ 1,000,000 meaning any amount over this amount could be subject to estate taxes . The top marginal tax rate for the state estate tax in Washington is 16 % .
Insurers typically use insurance scores not credit scores , but they are in-bedded with some of the same information . For most insurers this is one way of measuring your responsibility . Responsibility is a key ingredient in knowing if you understand what risks you are taking . Let me give you an example . Suppose you want to hand the keys of a new Ferrari over to a 16 year old . An insurer is going to look at that and say . . wait a minute , does that driver know how to drive such a powerful and expensive car . Will he or she give someone else the keys and let them drive . will he or she be using the car for delivery of Pizzas . All of those things might require a specific answer . Yet insurance scores give an insurer information on how you have acted in variety of situations and credit is part of that shorthand that conveys to an insurer that you are or are not a generally responsible person . The most accurate measure of how you will drive is how often you will drive . So be sure to add that element to your discussion with an agent . He or she may have polices from insurers who give discounts to those who use a vehicle say less than 4.000 mile s a year . Talk to your agent and give him or her enough information to be able to accurately present you and your exposures to many companies .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
Auto insurance rates are based on several factors . The clients driving history and experience , location and type of vehicle . Now there are other things taken into consideration which would be multi-packaging polices with the same company , multi-car , education and so on . An insurance company will take all this information and make a calculated rate based on all this criteria to determine a premium . So for example if you are a single male 25 years old who has been driving since 16 with no tickets or accidents and a college graduate driving a 2013 BMW the insurance company will take this information and come up with a rate . Now lets say the single male wants collision and comprehensive coverage and at least 100/300/100 liability limits on his policy for his $ 40,000 vehicle . The insurance company says if you pay us $ 600.00 for six months -LRB- just a number I made up -RRB- we will insure your car is covered up to the actual cash value and we will pay for any property damage you cause and bodily injury up to the limits you purchased . In a worst case scenario the single man can cause an accident -LRB- assuming he is liable -RRB- that could pay out as much as $ 440,000 . I would say this is a pretty inexpensive way to protect yourself .
Well that is a question for which the best answer is that it depends . Most carriers use rate differential on age . There is a much higher correlation of accidents involving youthful operators than with drivers who are more mature.Having said that , there are then refinements in each carrier 's rate methodology to develop the proper rate for them for the exposure presented . That often means that there are millions and millions of possible price points for an insurer in any given state . So , some insurers will define operators under age 25 uniformly or they may adjust at each age between licensing age -LRB- usually 16 -RRB- and the age of 25 . Some carriers further refine this with segmentation down to six month increments , so some one is 18 and one half might have a lower rate then someone who as just turned 18 . The best advice I can give you is visit with an independent agent who represents many companies so you can really compare for yourself and your situation .
That is an excellent question ! I had it when I was 16 , because I met all of my State 's requirements - I was of legal driving age , and the age of responsibility . I had a car , and was able to make the monthly payment . As long as you are of legal age and have a valid drivers license , and are able to make the payments , you should have no problems either ! Thanks for asking !
You should be able to get car insurance at age 16 ... which is the earliest age in most states when you can legally drive an automobile . If you are living with your parents , and they have current coverage , it is best to title the vehicle in their name so you can take advantage of many available discounts . When you are older and have built up some driving experience , you canalwaysconsiderpurchasing a policy in your name .
They price their products based on risk . That 's what insurance is . If you have a lot of tickets you are likely to wreck your car . You should pay more than a safe driver pays for auto insurance . You are riskier . If you have bad health , you have to pay more for health insurance and life insurance . You are more likely to be making claims on the insurance sooner . To not charge you more would require charging more to healthy people . Health insurance is changing from true insurance to an entitlement program . This will make it less costly than it is now for unhealthy people but it will raise rates for all the healthier and younger ones . It should be a good change but time will tell . But to answer your question ... would YOU want to be the insurance company and charge a 16-year old male driver with three tickets the same rate as the 45-year old woman with no tickets . If you answer yes , you should open an insurance company . You will get a lot of young customers before you go broke .
The cheapest car insurance for young will depend on your state and zip code . If you are a Maryland resident and you are between the agesof 16 and 20 , it will be very difficult not impossible to find insurance in the standard market . Some exceptions to this is when the Child goes on Parents Insurance policy . In Maryland , MAIF or the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund insures most young and inexperience drivers or experience driver with accidents and tickets . They must have been declined coverage by at least two standard insurance companies or none renewed by one to qualify for coverage with MAIF . In some cases Progressive may also be good with young drivers but their rates are better if the driver is at least 21 and have good credit score Hope this helps .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Why Does Health Insurance Go Up ?
Health insurance premiums are driven by claims . When medical claims increase due to inflation and utilization premiums must also rise accordingly . Your health insurance premiums can not be adjusted simply because of your own claims but rather for claims of your assigned group . Under Obamacare health insurance premiums will rise dramatically due to the new mandated coverages .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
When the premium goes up at the end of a Term life insurance policy is a good time to stop paying the premium . From that point on it will continue to go up in price annually , so unless the Insured person is very ill and does not plan on surviving for many more years , it will become cost prohibitive to keep paying that premium . It would be better to convert the Term policy to a permanent one before the premium goes up , because the conversion is not possible after that . If you are going to pay a higher premium , why not pay it for a permanent policy via a conversion , rather than one that will go up each year .
Why is whole life good ? Well there have been several answers that will cover the bases pretty well . A locked in premium , tax deferred growth , a death benefit that grows over time , etc. . Let me give you another reason . a reason that you may not realize until later in life if something happens to you but does n't kill you . That 's right people get sick . Diabetes , high blood pressure , heart problems and so on can and actually do happen to a large segment of our population . The reason I want to point out pertains to the things I just mentioned . Why is whole life good ? Because they ca n't take it away from you . YOU control the policy . The price ca n't go up , the policy ca n't really run out of years and end prematurely . Why is that important ? When I got sick with my type II , hyper tension and recently AFIB , what a reassurance it was to KNOW I was still in control of my policies , that they were n't going to end or explode in price on me . Whole life is expensive because it 's a product the INSURED controls . Cheers .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
That is a great question ! A lot of people have a hard time with the concept of insurance . I 'm young , nothing will happen to me ! Or I 'm a good driver , why do I need insurance ? But inevitably things do happen . You can be the best driver ever , but that does n't mean the teenager texting in the car behind you is ; or that something can go wrong , and you 're laid up in the hospital . Homeowners is the same way . No one thinks that things will go wrong with their house , why would I want it ? Insurance is there to protect you when things do go wrong . You would not think the insurance was a waste of money when you got the check to replace your belongings , or the one that allows you to pay for the hotel rooms that you are forced into when your home is damaged . Insurance is only a waste of money when you drastically undervalue it . Please consider it as protection , and not a waste . Thanks for asking !
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
In simple terms , a COBRA health insurance is a short-term continuation of the exact same group health plan you had with your employer prior to termination from that job . So , if you liked the coverage provided by the plan prior to termination , you will still like the coverage provided by the plan under COBRA administration because it is the same plan . What you may not like is the cost under COBRA administration . Many people incorrectly assume that COBRA rates are excessively higher than the rates you paid while employed . This is incorrect . By law , your insurance rates under COBRA can not exceed 102 % of the rate you were paying before termination . So , why does the COBRA premium seem so much higher than the premium prior to termination ? The answer is your employer 's contribution to your health insurance . While you were employed , your employer was definitely paying a portion of yours , the employee 's , health insurance premium . If you worked for a `` benefits rich '' employer , they may have been paying all your premium and even contributing some to your dependents ' coverage . Under COBRA , the employer no longer is responsible to contribute anything to your health insurance premium . You are therefore responsible for 100 % of your portion of the premium as well as that of your dependents . That is why the COBRA cost is more than you were seeing while employed . So , the real question then becomes is it cheaper for me to continue with my current group health plan under COBRA , or is there a better alternative in the personal health insurance marketplace . The only way to answer that question is to solicit quotes from personal health insurers .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
To compare life insurance rates , be sure you are comparing the same type of policy to another . E.g. Comparing 10 year term to 20 year term is not a legitimate comparison . Check to see how long the rates are guaranteed not to go up . If one 20 year policy is guaranteed not to go up in price for 20 years , it is not fair to compare it to a 20 year term policy that is guaranteed not to go up in 10 years . Do not compare a policy by the rating they give you . Compare them by price . Ratings are just words . Price is where the rubber meets the road . If you have a quote for a level premium that will not go up in price , and also quotes for graded coverage/policies that can go up in price , it is usually best to go with the level premium that will not go up in price , even if it is higher .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
That is a great question ! The better question though , is why would you want to ? I could maybe , possibly , barely , almostsee why if she were still driving the car ; if she had policies that bundled with yours and kept your rates low , or if she were making the payments . But she is n't going to be legally obligated to you anymore , and if she 's not going to be driving the car , probably is going to stop paying , drop you from her policies , and not care too much if your car gets a new dent or scratch . I 'm not suggesting in any way that your Ex is in any kind of way a bad person , or doing anything wrong . That is just the way it is . It may be better to just let that one go , and let her find a policy that will work best for her . If you 'd like to discuss this privately , please contact me , okay ? Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
A Term life insurance policy is one that will have the same premium for a set number of the years in the term . Some Term life insurance will guarantee that the premium will not go up for the entire term ; other Term life insurance will guarantee that the premium can not go up for part of the term . E.g. 30 year Term life may be guaranteed not to go up in price for the full 30 years , or it can be guaranteed not to go up for 20 of the 30 years and `` hope '' that it wo n't go up the last 10 years . Term life insurance does not have any cash value . If you quit paying on Term life , it will end after one month .
There are several reasons auto insurance goes up ... Unfortunately some of those reasons may have absolutely nothing to do with you . Remember , all insurance is is a big pool of money . Policy holders are grouped together and pay premiums into the pool . When a claim happens , money is pulled out of the pool . If too much money is pulled out , then more money has to be put in so premiums go up ... I know this is a very simplistic explanation and the realty is much more complex , but it is a fact that if a bunch of other people in your `` pool '' -LRB- your state or region -RRB- experience a lot of acidents or other losses - the rates for everyone in that `` pool '' are going up no matter if you have had an accicent , ticket or anything else . Of course , there are individual reasons why you premiums coud be going up based on your driving record , personal characteristics , etc. . Give your agent a call and they should be able to break your premium down and explain what part of an increase pertains to you specifically and what part is a rate increase by the carrier .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Can Afford Whole Life Insurance ?
A person with a fixed income or a person who is employed -LRB- in the ideal world -RRB- can usually afford whole life insurance . The premium -LRB- payments for the insurance -RRB- are based on a number of factors including : Amount of insurance coverage Age Gender Health status Income , etc. . The rule of thumb , at least in my insurance training , is that you should not pay more than 6 % of your monthly or annual income for life insurance . If you can afford to give up 6 % , then you should be fine . Your life insurance agent should discuss with you all these things before writing a policy on you .
Many cost conscience and affluent consumers can afford to pay for participating whole life insurance for their indemnification needs and do pay , but many do not because they can generally obtain the same coverage via a guaranteed universal life insurance policy . This is an affordability issue versus a wise use of the money issue . This becomes more evident if the consumer needs temporary coverage and selects term life insurance .
Better depends on available funds . Something is better than nothing . If you can not presently afford whole life , then getting term insurance is the smart thing . Getting whole life and not being able to afford it , may result in not paying the premium and being left with NO insurance . A reputable insurance agent will only sell you what you need AND can afford . Whole life never changes its premium , unlike term which will escalate at the end of the stated number of years . Also whole life builds up cash value . That value can be borrowed against , and not repaid , kept tax free , although it will lower the death benefit if not repaid . Whole life can eventually pay its own premium , from the cash value being built up . But be sure you can afford whole life at the beginning . Do not ever leave yourself with no insurance . Thank you . GARY LANE .
When you should sell whole life insurance is when there is a permanent need and the client can afford the coverage needed as whole life . Whole life insurance does not require as much management as a Universal life policy and is perhaps for the more conservative clients . The important thing to do is to cover the needs with what they can afford . You can always covert to whole life at a later date as the client can afford it . Participating whole life is often thought of as `` top on the of the line '' with it many features . With non par you get fully guaranteed coverage and lower premiums than par . As always it is a balance between desire , need , and affordabilty
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A whole life insurance policy is an extremely flexible product that can meet many needs in retirement . The most obvious need is death . It is obvious that retirement always ends in death . Death is not inexpensive . The proceeds of a whole life insurance policy can pay off some or all of those expenses . After a certain age term policies can not be written at any price . I recently had a client who forgot that there was a life policy on her husband . She was paying his funeral expenses on an installment plan . I discovered the policy and brought it to her attention . She was delighted . Another use of a whole life policy is to transfer property to heirs . Often a person will want to leave money to children , grandchildren or a favorite charity . They will then try to conserve their retirement assets so that money will be available when the die . Unfortunately they often rob themselves of lifes simple pleasures in their drive to provide that inheritance . A life insurance policy can do that at the beginning of retirement leaving the person the balance of assets to spend as they wish . Some people have estates that are subject to estate tax . The problem with estate tax is that if there isnt cash to pay the taxes , assets are often sold at below market value to pay the tax . Having cash can make the difference of keeping the family business going , maintaining the family farm or closing them up for taxes . Since that can happen at any time , a whole life policy is particularly flexible in that regard . Whole life insurance is often used when a person wants to leave a specific valuable asset to one child but wants to treat all the children in the same manner . The heirs that are not going to get that valuable asset could receive equivalent proceeds from a whole life policy and everyone would be happy . A whole life policy is often used to purchase the interest of another party in a business . In this case the surviving partners dont particularly want to share everything with a widow who may not be acquainted with the business . A whole life policy can provide the cash to take care of that situation by giving the survivors the funds they need to purchase the widows interests . Sometimes whole life insurance is used to fund day to day living expenses in retirement . I just finished a comparison that showed that a whole life policy performed as well as a fixed annuity in accumulating money for retirement and that it did that with the promise to pay the full benefit should the person die before retiring . The whole life policy has non-forfeiture provisions which can pay a lifetime stream of income if desired or the policy would also give the person the flexibility to use the policy in other ways depending upon future , unforeseen events . This may sound strange but I often get requests for whole life insurance from older individuals . They seem to appreciate the value of lasting protection at a fixed price .
Most agents who sell Term Life Insurance also sell Whole Life . The exception may be some of the `` term shops '' on the internet . Final expense policies are usually Whole Life , so agents specializing in Senior life insurance would carry Whole Life . These usually have under $ 100,000 face amounts . `` Captive '' agencies -LRB- where they sell products for one company -RRB- usually have good Whole Life products for persons looking for larger face amounts . So do agencies that sell multiple products , but you need to consult with a licensed agent who understands Whole Life . A good way to start would be to call and ask for an agent who can compare a couple of Whole Life policies for you in detail . If they are unable to do that , move on to the next one .
The simple answer is : you should pay an amount that you can afford . People who buy life insurance with the last dollar in their monthly budget will end up dropping their policy when emergencies arise . Life insurance that is dropped is of no value at all . Setting aside an affordable amount to pay life insurance premiums will help ensure that your policy is active when needed . Also , many people feel that if they ca n't buy a large amount of life insurance , they will buy none at all . Who among us would not welcome an extra $ 10,000 of cash at the traumatic time of losing a loved one and trying to take time off work , arrange for a funeral , house relatives or travel to the location of the funeral ? It does not take a million dollar policy to show love for those who are left behind . Of course , premiums differ for different types of policies and different types of risk . If you are using your life insurance to provide income during retirement , it will take a much larger portion of your budget than if you are just funding your funeral . Also , life insurance for those who are older or of poorer health will cost more than life insurance for young , healthy persons . But there is also a greater chance of the death benefit being paid out sooner when the insured person is older or suffers from poor health . A licensed agent can help you look at your whole financial picture and pick out a policy that will meet your needs at an affordable cost .
Whole life policies are well suited for needs that do not diminish over time . Some commonly found uses for whole life are : Family protection : To provide funds to support a surviving spouse and/or minor children , particularly for individuals who start a family later in life ; to pay final bills , such as medical or other estate expenses and federal and state death taxes . Business planning : Whole life insurance is often used for many different business purposes , such as insuring key employees , in split-dollar insurance arrangements , and funding non-qualified deferred compensation plans . Business continuation planning often involves using whole life insurance as a source of funds for buy-sell agreements . Accumulation needs : Some individuals will use the cash value feature of whole life as a way of accumulating funds for specific purposes , such as funding college education , or as a supplemental source of retirement income . Charitable gifts : To provide funds for a gift to charity . Whole life insurance , sometimes called permanent insurance , or ordinary life , is designed to stay in force throughout ones lifetime . As long as the policy owner meets his or her obligations under the policy , the policy remains in force , regardless of any changes in health that may occur . Unlike term insurance , where premium payments generally increase , as the insured gets older -LRB- the chance of death increases with age -RRB- , premiums for most whole life policies remain level . A portion of each premium payment is set aside to earn interest . Over time , a whole life policy will develop cash values . The accumulated cash values form a reserve which enable the insurer to pay a policys full death benefit , while keeping premiums level . During life , many whole life policies have provisions to borrow a portion of the accumulated cash value . If a policy is terminated without the insured dying , there are various surrender options for the cash value available to a policy owner . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
When is not necessarily the best question to ask as to why to buy whole life insurance . If you know why you are purchasing insurance , that will help to determine your when . Most whole life policies pay out very little in dividends so I would look at other vehicles if you want dividends . Also , life insurance isa tax free vehicle when it pays out so consider that when you are looking at life insurance . To get to the root of the answer , most people purchase Whole Life policies as final expense policies because there is n't much of a reason to purchase Whole Life policies otherwise . The interest rate is dismal , dividends are not worth mentioning . The cost of a whole life policy can be affordable as to building up the savings or investment vehicle versus on your own . So , I would not purchase a whole life policy prior to age 50 .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
Whole life insurance has many advantages to it . The first being that your premiums are fixed and guaranteed for the rest of your life and as a permanent insurance program , it builds cash value over time . If it 's a participating whole life policy , any dividends that are paid out can be used to either increase the death benefit via paid up additions , reduce your premium , or make a payment to you directly -LRB- options depend on which carriers whole life policy you have -RRB- . If you use the dividends to reduce the premium , the policy can become self-sustaining after a number of years - meaning no more premium payments . Non-participating policies only build cash value - these types of plans do not pay out dividends . If you 're buying whole life coverage when you 're young and its cash value builds for years and years , it can create a nice nest egg for funds that can be used during your retirement years . It 's important to remember that if you borrow from an insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the monies are expected to be paid back . If you cash out the policy , you lose the life insurance coverage . An alternative for those who are not very concerned about the cash value and want to maximize the death benefit of your life insurance , you may want to consider a guaranteed universal life policy instead of whole life . GULs can offer a larger amount of coverage than whole life policies for the same premium or save you a ton of money on your premiums for a given level of coverage . Make sure to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can create a structure that will best serve your needs , goals , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Affordable Term Life Insurance is a policy that you can afford . An experienced agent who has your best interests in mind , and who has a variety of products to choose from , can find you the most affordable life insurance policy . Websites that offer choices from many companies AND the personal assistance of an experienced agent , in my opinion , are a great place to find affordable life insurance .
I would not say that whole life is better than term life . It really depends on the clients need for life insurance . Whole life insurance name is literal , it is a face amount of life insurance that will last your whole life at a fixed premium . It is typically more expensive than term when your young therefore the face amount is typically less than a term insurance counter part . It is however much more affordable in later years because of the fixed rate . Term life insurance is typically more affordable in younger years with a fixed time period of level premiums such as 5-10-15-20-30-35 years . Term life insurance is used to cover a time period of debt such a mortgage . For example you purchase a home with a $ 250,000 mortgage for 30 years . It would be prudent to purchase a $ 250,000 30 year term policy as well . Try to avoid mortgage life insurance unless you are uninsurable . This term is known as decreasing term life and reduces as the mortgage is repaid . With straight term life , your loved ones will receive the difference of the face amount instead of the insurance company .
Whole life insurance is for a very special kind of person . First of all , you are someone who sees the need for life insurance protection on a lifelong basis . Not just to cover the mortgage , not just to protect your family , not just as a supplement for your retirement . You face the fact that as life goes on , your need for life insurance changes , but for many people , the need is always there . And it could be for you . You know that if you bought term insurance , odds are you 'd end up buying another policy anyway , after that one renews . At a higher price . And hopefully youre insurable . Might as well lock in to guaranteed rates on a permanent basis . This brings up the second point . You are a guarantee-oriented type of person . You realize that life insurance is the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it has to be strong . Reliable . You do n't want too many variables in this product because , if you have a shaky foundation , your whole portfolio could crumble . Therefore , you want a guarantee on the premium , and you want a guarantee on the death benefit . You are also someone who appreciates the added benefit of cash value inside whole life insurance . For many people , whole life insurance is the guaranteed portion of their asset portfolio . No other product gives better guarantees -LRB- go ahead and check out the interest rates on guaranteed products out there . Then compare them to the guarantees whole life gives you . -RRB- On top of that , with a top-flight company , the dividends - the non-guaranteed portion of the cash build up - can be pretty rich . With a little strategic thinking , those dividends can enhance the value of that product . They can be used to offset the cost . They can be used to enhance the survivor benefit . They can be used to put cash in your pocket . They can be used to offset the cost of another policy . Lastly , whole life insurance is for disciplined people . In order to receive all the benefits named above , you need to stick to the payment schedule . It 's a fixed-premium product and will not tolerate underfunding , or over funding , or skipping payments . If you realize the bang for the buck you can get with whole life insurance , and have the discipline to stick to a premium payment schedule , then you 'll be glad you bought this policy .
Whole Life Insurance can range in price from very low to very high . It depends on your age and health among other things . We always recommend getting a policy of whole life for a child , to insure their `` insurability '' for the future , at an extremely low cost . As you get a big older , the price rises , but slowly . The younger you are , the better it is to get whole life then , before it continues to rise . With good health and a reasonable age , whole life can be very affordable , especially when you factor in it allows you to take cash out for emergencies or retirement , or to help pay the future premiums . New York Life even offers Custom Whole Life , which allows you to stop paying your premiums completely and keep your life insurance . Gary Lane , Agent , New York Life , 949 797 2424 . Thank you .
You can choose to pay Whole Life for the rest of your life , or you can choose to have it paid up at a set time . You can even choose to purchase some whole life policies with one premium , called Single Premium Whole Life . Premiums are proportionately larger , the shorter the time you choose to pay them . Shop around for a Whole Life policy that offers the options you desire , at a premium you can afford .
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Is Pension Plan Income Taxable ?
In Canada , pension plan income is taxable . Pension contributions by the company and the individual are tax deductible . The funds inside the plan grow tax deferred . Consequently when income is received from the plan it is taxable . Retirement income planning often requires the assistance of professionals . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is a great question ! In most cases , your deductions from your check to fund the pension plan were taken out before being taxed . If that was the case , then all of the income you are receiving from it now is taxable . If your pension plan was funded with after tax dollars , then your income would be tax free . That is one of the great advantages of a Roth IRA , that when you need the cash , it 's not subject to being taxed . I hope that helps , thank you for asking !
There are ways to save your entire income for retirement if you desire . There are tax qualified plans that defer the taxation on a retirement program and they have annual contribution limits . If you are choosing to save for retirement using 401 -LRB- k -RRB- elective deferral , if you are eligible for a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- or a 457 Deferred Compensation plan , you could reduce your taxable income by up to $ 18,000 in 2015 . If you are over age 50 you can increase those limits by $ 6,000 . You can make contributions to a simple IRA and reduce your taxable income by $ 12,500 and add on an additional $ 6,000 if you are over age 50 . You can establish a defined benefit pension plan and reduce your income by $ 210,000 in 2015 . If you use a defined contribution plan you can reduce your taxable income by up to $ 53,000 . There are a variety of other limits depending upon whether you have highly compensated employees or key employees . The other most important limitation is on the ability of a person to participate in a Roth IRA . The maximum income you can have for a single tax payer is $ 131,000 to participate in a Roth IRA . If you are married the maximum income limit is $ 193,000 . Notice I didnt say anything about reducing taxable income . The Roth IRA is funded with after-tax income ; however , qualified withdrawals can be received income tax free .
In Canada , pension plan income is taxable . Pension contributions by the company and the individual are tax deductible . The funds inside the plan grow tax deferred . Consequently when income is received from the plan it is taxable . Retirement income planning often requires the assistance of professionals . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Annuity withdrawals from a non-registered immediate or payout annuity consist of an interest portion and a return of capital portion . In Canada , you are not taxed on the return of capital portion , but you are taxed on the interest portion . Think of annuities as the opposite of a mortgage . In a 25 year mortgage , early payments consist of mostly interest with little going towards the principle . With an annuity , the early payments you receive are mostly taxable interest and a little of your own principle . For those individuals who can qualify , a prescribed annuity equalizes the interest income . For example , with a 25 year annuity the total interest earned is divided by 25 and spread out equally over the term of the contact . Increased after tax income in the early years is the result . There are specific rules governing prescribed annuities , If you are interested in more information , please contact me . Income from a payout annuity may qualify for income splitting for income tax purposes . This allows you to transfer up to 50 % of the taxable income earned from the payout annuity . Missing out on the federal pension income income tax credit ? Income from a payout annuity may qualify for the $ 2,000 non-refundable tax credit . Note : Interest earned on a Guaranteed Investment Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also may qualify . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
That is a great question ! In most cases , your deductions from your check to fund the pension plan were taken out before being taxed . If that was the case , then all of the income you are receiving from it now is taxable . If your pension plan was funded with after tax dollars , then your income would be tax free . That is one of the great advantages of a Roth IRA , that when you need the cash , it 's not subject to being taxed . I hope that helps , thank you for asking !
How to plan for retirement with a Pension ? A couple basic things to consider . First is this pension going to be enough ? Are you able to fund other investment choices to boost your retirement income ? How is debt going into retirement ? The main thing in planning with a defined benefit pension is going to be what survivor option to take ? Take a full pension and if you pass before your spouse , the money stops . Take a partial pension with survivor benefits and you leave money behind or if your spouse passes before you , lost retirement funds . This is where life insurance can come to the rescue , as a life policy can allow a person to pension max their retirement with the life insurance policy becoming a secondary pension plan for your spouse if you pass before them .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
Can I borrow against my retirement plan ? With some plans , yes you can . But with this option the question becomes `` should you '' ? Loan provisions would be most common with a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- plan . While usually hardship related , the reasons have been reduced from hardship only status for some time . Trucks , cars , vacations were the norm for a while with retirement plans loans . The problem with pension loans is they take funds out of the investment pool . Sure you 're paying yourslef back , but at 5 % . What happens when those funds , left alone would have made 10 % ? Also if you leave employment for any reason , the loan balance is due immediately or it becomes a pre-mature distribution . So taxable income and a 10 % penalty . Borrowing from your pension is a last resort only choice . Never a first choice .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
yes , medicare provides 100 days of home care and the medicare advantage plans also has home care as a benefit in the plans available . There also plans availble now that you can use to take investments that are now fully taxable and invest the funds into the Pension Protection Act provisions and when you use use these dollars to pay qualified health care costs they are not taxable
Let me answer by beginning by asking you a question . How much do you expect your final burial costs to be ? Does that cover your wife ? What about any `` estate planning needs '' you may have ? Also remember the growth in that policy has grown tax deferred . Are you aware that you can convert that life insurance policy into an `` immediate annuity '' or you may want to use the cash value for `` long term care '' planning . If so , are yuo familair with the provisions of the Private Pension Act that allows you to convert that policy into a plan that is covered by the Private Pension Act and when you use the `` cash value '' to pay qualified medical expense , which includes you paying for care in your home , the cash value is not taxable .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
Retirement income involves a variety of income streams for many people . The best pension plan would be one that your employer provides that includes contributions from the employer . We call that free money . The next best plan is any plan that allows you to defer taxation either at the time of contribution or at the time that you receive income . Most people dont have the option to select pension programs but retirement income planning is a growing field and you might be able to locate someone to help you .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Which retirement plan is right for your small business depends on what you what your objectives are and the resources you are willing to commit . Retirement plans for all employees ? Key employees only ? In Canada , if you choose a group RRSP or a defined contribution pension plan , the company can determine the amount of contribution . The amount of the retirement income value or pension depends on investment growth . If you choose a defined benefit pension plan , the the company guarantees the amount of the retirement income and the amount of contribution is unknown . In that case the risk to the company increases . There are a number of solutions available depending on your objectives . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are conditions under which the assets of a pension plan can be transferred to either another pension plan or to an Individual Retirement Account -LRB- IRA . -RRB- Pension plans have vesting schedules which might limit the amount of the pension that can be transferred . It is best when these transfers are conducted between trustees . It is more complicated if the employee receives the funds in cash .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is A Good Life Insurance Policy ?
First of all , it is one you can afford . One you will continue to pay and not allow to lapse . Any insurance is better than no insurance , so get something and get it now . The younger you are , the less it will cost . If you can get a permanent policy , that will lock in your price for the rest of your life , regardless of your health in the future . If you can not afford whole life now , then at least get term coverage right away . The better the reputation of the company the more reliable they are likely to be . Go with an old , large company . They are likely to still be around and offer you the variety you want at a fair price . Think about all your financial needs and your family 's . Then try to get a face value to protect all of that if you can afford it . Again , remember , something is better than nothing . Gary Lane 949 797 2424 . New York Life Agent .
A good life insurance policy is one that : > is with a reputable company -LRB- rated A or better by AM Best -RRB- , > has good guarantees -LRB- e.g. if term insurance , the premium is guaranteed not to go up for the entire term -RRB- , > is with an agency that provides good service -LRB- you have to ask about this ; sometimes it is easier to get a hold of online agents than local offices -RRB- , > fits your budget -LRB- you do n't want to have to drop your policy a year later because you ca n't afford it -RRB- , and > covers your needs -LRB- you do n't want to take out $ 10,000 in Whole Life if you want the life insurance to protect your mortgage -RRB- . That last point covers a lot of area , as there are different types of policies to fit many different purposes for life insurance . The best way to get a good life insurance policy is to contact a good life insurance agent who will guide you through the options and help you find the beset for your situation .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
To find good life insurance , find a good broker . He or she will help you determine what is good for you . What amount ... what cost ... what carrier are good for you ? A good broker will help you find out - and find this all out before you apply , so you can be confident of the outcome of underwriting . Good life insurance is a policy you are glad to buy .
A good life insurance agent has some important characteristics . A good agent is a good listener . A good agent will listen to you and will check with you to make sure that you are fully understood . A good agent communicates clearly to both you and to the insurance company . The agent should explain as completely as possible the details of the policy and patiently answer your questions . The good agent will communicate your information and concerns to the underwriting staff of the insurance company . Underwriters are usually quite conservative . The more that the agent can paint a picture that the underwriter can understand ; it is more likely that you will have a good outcome . Finally a good agent offers sound financial advice . A good agent isnt an order taker . A good agent will show you the advantages of alternate approaches to your problem . A good agent will not leave out anything vital to the case and will carefully counsel you as it regards your unique situation . Are there many good life insurance agents ? I think that there are , however , they are often in demand and do little to solicit business . You probably need to check with your colleagues and friends and locate that good life insurance agent that they trust .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
There is no way to say what life insurance will cost for any one person . Good life insurance is a policy that has some guarantees , is with a good company , and accomplishes the purposes for which you are purchasing it . To find what the cost of good life insurance for you , you 'd need to contact an agency that will help you discern your purposes for your policy , then find your best rate from a good life insurance company .
In addition to selecting a good life insurance professional and a company with good rating , you choose a good life insurance policy by knowing the features of the policy . Are the premiums guaranteed to stay the same for x number of years -LRB- for Term life or some Universal life -RRB- or are they guaranteed to stay the same for the rest of your life -LRB- for Whole life or GUL -RRB- ? Will the policy pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one for death by any reason -LRB- except suicide in first two years -RRB- ? Is the policy convertible to a permanent policy ? If so , how long and to what product -LRB- s -RRB- ? If accumulating cash value , what is the guaranteed interest rate ? You will want to see an illustration showing policy values and cost indexes . What riders are available and what is their cost ? Details like this can cause you to choose one policy over another , so do n't be afraid to ask questions .
Picture this : You are a newborn , just a few weeks old . Your parents love you dearly and want everything in the world for you . They especially want you to be strong financially . They think ahead and realize that life insurance is going to be key to your financial future . So they take out a policy . On you . With one of them as the owner and beneficiary . Its a good-size policy , from a good strong company , that provides solid guarantees . Its designed to last your lifetime . They just keep paying the premium and let it ride . The guaranteed cash values grow , the non-guaranteed cash values grow , and the survivor benefit increases . Just let it ride . When you become an adult , they gift it over to you . Of course , their attorney advises on how to handle the transaction . So now , you know what ? You are walking into adulthood with a life insurance policy already in place . The cost is fantastically low because it was issued when you were just a little kid . And it has a lot of other perks as well . When you buy a home and want to cover the mortgage , you will need life insurance . Good news ! You already have it . If you start a business and need a bank loan , the lender will want you to have a policy in place . Good news ! You already have it . Here are some other perks : You may take a job that requires foreign travel . That might make a new policy pricey . Or you might take up mountain climbing as a hobby . That might make a new policy pricey . Or you might unfortunately come down with a chronic medical condition . That might make a new policy pricey . Well , you wont need new coverage because - Good news ! You already have it . And what if you have an emergency expense and need access to cash quickly ? You have it in your policy . What if you want to start a new business and need starting capital ? You have it in your policy . Maybe you need a source of funds to supplement your retirement income ? You have it in your policy . Yes , I think life insurance is good for kids , because kids become adults .
Term life insurance is good to pay large expenses that only last for a set length of time . A mortgage , small business loan , or tuition loan are some large liabilities that most people do not have the money saved up to pay off , if they should die prematurely . But they are expenses that will not last forever . Therefore , Term insurance is a low cost way to cover those large debts for a set period of time , without breaking the bank . Another thing Term insurance is good for is raising a family . I recommend purchasing Term insurance long enough to get the youngest child to at least age 23 . Not in every case , but generally , I feel that Term insurance is not good for small face amounts . Most people who rely on life insurance to cover small debts , will also need life insurance to cover their final expenses . There are so many reasonably priced Whole Life policies that can be purchased in very small face amounts , and for persons of all type of health . And you can really save a lot of money on those policies by buying them at a younger age . Some can be paid up in a set number of years , and some have such good cash value that , if you decided to stop paying on the policy in the future , you would still have a decent sized paid up policy to hold onto . Of course , Term Life is also not good for any need that does not end until death . E.g. Funeral costs , paying estate settlement costs , passing money to grandchildren , etc. . Unless you know that you will have a large stream of money in the future so that you can afford to convert your Term insurance to permanent later on , you are usually better off just buying Whole Life or guaranteed no lapse Universal Life , to start with , for needs that do not end until death . Those are my general opinions on what Term Life Insurance is good for , and what it is not so good for . There are many exceptions as each person 's situation is different and policies can be set up to accomplish different purposes . Please do not hesitate to give me a call if you 'd like to discuss this in person .
What is a good rate for whole life insurance ? What ever you can qualify for is the correct answer . You are the discount . Your good health and good health history reduces the rate for whole life -LRB- actually all types of life insurance basically -RRB- and provides you the discounted cost you seek . So if you have taken good care of yourself , the best rates will be available to you .
It can be very confusing to try to figure out what type of life insurance policy to buy , what amount , and from what company . As a rule , life insurance policies only come in a few types -LRB- Term , Whole , Universal and variations such as Indexed or Variable -RRB- . Many companies carry all of them . However , some policies do have features that are more favorable than others . E.g. longer guarantee periods , greater cash value , etc. . In that respect , some companies carry policies with better features than others . It is always a good idea to look at the rating of the life insurance company itself . If its rating with AM Best , Fitch , S&P and/or Moody 's is good , most likely the life insurance carried by that company will have good products to choose from . And you will know that they will pay out if needed , which is of utmost consideration .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
There are quite a few good insurance companies out there . What you want to do is look at financial ratings to get an idea of the quality of a carrier . Carriers pay financial ratings companies to review their books and assign a letter grade as a representation of the company 's quality . Different ratings agencies view companies with a different pov , so it is always good when choosing a good company to find one that has been reviewed by several ratings companies . You might want to check with your state insurance commissioner 's office to see what complaints or fines have been applied to companies . The good thing to know , is there are a lot of companies that are good out there . That is where the strength of the insurance industry is . Not just a few companies , but many companies of quality .
First , you need to understand what Good Life Insurance is . Good Life Insurance is the insurance you have in place when you need it , the day you die . That said , what is it you are looking for ? death benefit supplemental income living benefits such as Critical Illness & Chronic Illness Estate Protection College Savings , etc. . Once you know what your needs are or you identify what is important to you , then you need to find a reputable company who can offer the products which will maximize your benefits with the least amount of premium . Contact your agent/broker to get some illustrations based on what you are looking for .
Shopping for Medicare Supplement insurance can be confusing . You should find an independent insurance broker or agent , who can help you shop and also can explain the ins & outs of Medicare with you . A good agent will have multiple companies to offer you and will be able to discuss your particular needs and budget to determine what plan design and company would meet your needs . Most who carry Medicare Supplements will also be able to assist you with Part D coverage as well . There are also Medicare `` Advocates '' in many states who are trained by Medicare . They can be a tremendous help in educating people about Medicare in general , what product choices that a person will have & usually can assist in Part D enrollment . What I have found with these people is that even if they can discuss all of the supplement plans with someone - they can not actually enroll them , since they are not salespeople . But , they are a very good source of agnostic information . In addition , there are many online sources to run quotes & see rates . Even though that sounds like a good way to shop , it does n't provide overall education about differences in various companies , the issue basis of the policies being quoted , or any state specific laws and rules that could impact the person applying in the future . Even if someone has a good idea of various rates , it 's still best to sit down with a real person & make sure you receive all of the information necessary to make a good decision .
If you were to cover every contingency of life with life insurance , you probably could not afford that much . Life insurance is a wonderful resource for the `` what if 's '' of life , but the `` what if 's '' can be endless . What if you died leaving your family without your income . What if before you died , you used up all your savings on doctor bills . Then , what if your spouse died shortly after you . What if the person you designated to care for your children , had just lost their job . What if ... . No one can have enough life insurance to cover every possible tragedy . But you can have enough life insurance to give your loved ones a chance . Providing them with enough income to give them time to adjust to life without you , without having to worry about getting a new job -LRB- or adding a second job to the one they already have -RRB- , is a good place to start . Giving them enough to live on until your children are grown , or for 10 years , is also a reasonable amount .
If you have good health , that is always the best time to buy life insurance . It is cheaper when you have good health . If you have poor health , that is a good reason to buy life insurance . People with poor health need that protection . So good health or poor health , now is a good time to buy life insurance .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Health And Disability Insurance ?
Health insurance is designed to pay providers for medical services . Disability insurance was created to pay the insured the benefit amount in the event of a qualifying disability . Disability income insurance comes in two forms : Short term disability Long term disability Short term is just what it sounds like and is inexpensive to pick up . Long term DI can cost significantly more due to the risk the carrier takes on to cover the insured for a longer period .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
What to look for in Disability Insurance ? While there are many options to consider with disability insurance , a `` good '' disability policy comes down to one defining sentence . The most important thing is `` the definition of what disability IS . '' You see payment from a disability plan all comes down to what qualifies as a disability based on the definition of disability in the contract -LRB- policy -RRB- . If it is not simple and straight forward in this definition , you might want to look elsewhere . Pretty much beyond the first couple sentences about the definition of disability in a DI policy are terms where they take away from the definition , they exclude and make exceptions . The best policies are straight forward without a lot of fluff when it comes to that definition . And with a disability policy , words are everything .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
What type of disability insurance should I get ? The one that provides you the best definiton of disability that you can afford . Disability insurance is all about the definition of what is a `` disability '' . What you 'll find is the best disability plans have the fewest words in describing what disability is . Without a solid definition , you have a policy you pay for , that does n't pay you back when you have a claim .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
How does health insurance work while on disability ? Since I just ended 12 months of disability that included many hospitalizations and treatments , I can tell you it works exactly the same as not being disabled . Disability insurance protects your income , health insurance protects your health . You can have both going on at once . Depending on your employment situation , how your health insurance is paid for may make a difference . Maybe your employer continues to pick it up , maybe it 's covered under workman 's comp , maybe you pay your own premiums . . the main thing is health insurance does n't go away if you 're collecting disability insurance .
Long Term Disability Insurance is a separate policy from Health Insurance . If you suffer an extended injury or illness that renders you unable to work , you will start receiving Disability Insurance benefits -LRB- after the waiting period , or `` elimination '' period , is over -RRB- . These benefits are paid to you in cash and you can use that cash as you wish . There is a Waiver of Premium rider that can be applied to some policies , including some Health Insurance policies . If you had this on your Health Insurance policy , it would allow you to keep your health insurance without paying future premiums if you were severely disabled . If you had this rider on your Disability Insurance policy , it would allow you to stop payments on your Disability Insurance , not your Health Insurance .
When reviewing your disability insurance options , you should be sure to understand the differences between company contracts . With disability insurance , the key to the contract is the definition of disability and definition and requirements of the policy benefits . All disability contracts are NOT created equal . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . Guardian offers this definition and is our group 's top disability company to write business with . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Some things to consider when buying disability insurance are : 1 -RRB- Do you want short term disability insurance , or long term disability insurance , or both ? Long term disability is recommended if you can not afford both , as the effects of being unable to work for many months or years is the most devastating . 2 -RRB- How much -LRB- what % -RRB- of your income do you wish to replace ? It usually makes sense to get as much as you can . 3 -RRB- Do you want to spend more to have Own Occupation feature ? If not , you will need to go back to work when you can do any job . With `` own occ '' you will be paid until you can go back to your own occupation . 4 -RRB- What about Residual Disability ? Getting a policy that offers Residual Disability enables you to receive a partial benefit based proportionate to the amount of income lost when able to resume working part time -LRB- unlike Partial Disability , which just pays a set % -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What does your policy cover ? Make sure it covers illness and injury , and review the conditions covered .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Much Does The Average Person Spend On Home Insurance ?
The average cost of a homeowners insurance policy is going to vari from one geographic area to another . In my area I estimate that the average cost for a homeowners policy is about 700-1000 / yr.Homeowners insurance will vary depending on home values , claims history for the area , and many other factors . Contact your local agent to find out what coverage is available in your area and the cost associated with it .
To figure out how much life insurance you need with kids , you can make a little worksheet . Put down how much your family spends on average each year , and subtract your spouse 's salary from that . The difference is what you need to cover . Multiple it by how many years until your children are adults . Throw in extra for college . That is how much life insurance you may want to purchase .
The average rating people get for life insurance is Standard . From that , you can determine the average cost for persons of different ages . Keep in mind that the average cost for an 80 year old is going to be much different than the average cost for a 20 year old . As will the average cost for someone with diabetes as compared with someone with perfect health . The length of the term , or whether the policy is a permanent policy , have a great effect on the premium , as well . It is a good idea to go into a life insurance sale with your top dollar that you can spend , in mind . Then see if you can get a policy that suits your needs for a premium a little lower than that . Something is better than nothing , and by consulting with an honest and knowledgeable agent , most people can find coverage at a price they can afford .
It depends on how much Personal Property you have , and how many additional coverages you opt for . But for an average Renters policy in my agency they are usually somewhere between $ 10-20 a month . Some people spend that much on coffee in a day , but do n't even consider protecting their personal belongings !
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
That really depends on what you can afford for your out of pocket expense . Many will say Higher deductible keeps your rates lower . Yes this is true to a point actually how much are you really saving . In Montana that average different if the premium is not that much . The difference between a $ 100 Deductible and a $ 1000 Deductible for comprehensive if only about $ 7.00 a month difference in rate . So Yes you are spending $ 7.00 more a month but in the event of a loss you are putting $ 900 less out of your pocket . Many glass shops will waive the deductible also so there many things to think about . 1St thing is do you have enough money laying around to cover the deductible amount / If you wreck your car and take it to the shop the insurance company will pay their portion but the shop will not release your car till you pay yours . Coming up with a $ 1000 maybe much harder to come up with . I would contact your agent and ask them how much a month difference it is in the rate before you jump in to conclusion . Be advised that agents that are posting answers to this question or any question are not to be posting there business information as your last person that answered the question did . You can reach the agent answering the question by the contact them button on the side . Hope this helps you with the information you need .
That is an excellent question !!!! We could spend a whole lot of time on this , but I 'll break it down to three things . The first : Decide how you want your retirement to look . Travel , quiet home living , move somewhere , what do you want to do to spend your days ? Second , determine what that future will cost you . How well prepared for that future are you today ? How long do you have to make funding it a reality ? What kind of ground do you have to cover to ensure that it can happen the way that you envision it ? The third : Put together a plan that gets you there , or as close to there , as possible . That plan has to account for your risk tolerance , safe financial living in the meantime , and the ability to create the income that you will need . Spend a little time and put together for yourselves a snapshot of where you are , and where you want to be . Once you have that , find an advisor that you can trust , and get started making your dream a reality . If you want to spend a little more time on the details , please feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to help you . Thank you for asking !
Comparing Long Term Care plans can be confusing for most people . Sometimes the underwriting process can be lengthy and LTC plans can be costly . When you 're looking through the information from the different companies and they talk about the average length of stay in a nursing home , you have to look beyond the stated number that includes all ages and focus on ages 75 and older . When you look at that age group nearly 3 out of 10 spend less than 100 days and the other 6 spend less than two years . Fro most people I 've found that Short Term Care Plans are a much better choice . They can provide the same type of income for a fraction of the cost . Most plans are issued in under 10 day .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
How important is having a paycheck ? Try to imagine no paycheck . How much money would you need to pay your bills if you were disabled 30 months , the average time of a disability ? So buy term and spend the difference on disability insurance . Its paycheck protection you need .
A life insurance agent sells life insurance . Their job is a combination of marketer , school teacher , and entertainer . You spend most of your time looking for people who want to talk about insuring your family . Then you spend a much smaller amount of time teaching the person how everything actually works and what their options are . Then after all that you spend the next week trying to convince the insurance company to accept the applicant and that they are n't already one foot in the grave .
The average person spends approximately $ 4000 - $ 9,000 per year on health insurance . Of course , this assumes that some consumers spend nothing at all , either because they are uninsured or anemployerpays the entire amount . The figures I mentioned also assume that many consumers pay very high premiums , perhaps in excess of $ 10,000 per year , because of age , medical conditions or both .
An Average person driving an average car living in an average neighborhood with an average driving record who wants average coverage 's and drives an average amount of miles and holds an average job with an average wife and average kids and an average income would surely pay an average price . However as an agent to be a little more specific I would need the answers to what is average .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Does the value proposition make sense for long term care insurance which protects extended care risk of assisted living and nursing home care . The average married couple spends $ 250,000 during retirement on medical expenses and extended care . The odds are that you 'll live longer than the preceding generation . If that 's true you need extended care even longer . A non smoking married couple both age 60 will pay around $ 300 a month for $ 7,000 a month benefit totally $ 420,000 . Does that make sense ?
Medicaid qualified annuities , or `` Medicaid friendly annuities '' , are annuities that can sometimes be used by couples when one person in the couple enters a nursing home . One spouse is able to keep half their assets and the home he/she lives in , the other spouse must spend down the other half on nursing home care before becoming eligible for Medicaid . Rather than spend down those funds , the spouse entering the nursing home transfers the money to the other spouse , who puts it in an irrevocable , immediate annuity that is set to pay the at-home spouse an income up to the number of years left in his/her life expectancy . Consult a knowledgeable elder law attorney in your state to see if this is allowed in your state , and to know all the pro 's and con 's before endeavoring to take out a Medicaid qualified annuity .
I love this question ! I have clients right now who pay more for collision coverage than they could ever collect on a total loss . It make no sense at all , it 's just what they 've always done . There 's a loose formula that I use in advising my clients about insuring an older vehicle . Look on KBB.com or Edmunds and get a rough idea of what your car is worth . Do n't use the `` clean retail '' . That 's completely unrealistic . Use the average trade or rough . It 'll be closer to the truth . Also check autotrader to get a range of what the cars are being listed for . Once you have a pretty good idea of what your car is worth , compare it to the cost of your physical damage coverage . If the cost of the coverage is more than 10 % of the value , you might consider dropping the coverage . That means that , in about 2-3 years , you 'd spend more than the value of the car . If you do have an accident , you get to make the decision on whether to repair the car or replace it . You 've already saved enough to do either -LRB- if you have n't spent your savings -RRB- . Bottom line , be aware of what your vehicles are worth and act accordingly . Spending money on coverage that would n't pay much does n't make a whole lot of sense . That 's not your agent 's place to decide for you , but we deal with it a lot and can make a suggestion . Find a good agent you can trust and go through the process . You 'll save money in the long run .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Before buying long term care insurance , it is a good idea to look at the area in which you anticipate you will be living when you reach the age where long term care may be needed , and see what their average rates for assisted living and nursing home care run . Talk to your family and get their ideas on arrangements if that type of care was needed . Review your budget and determine how much you have to spend on long term care , and tell that to your agent when you start . An agent can save you a lot of time and frustration from looking at all kinds of bells and whistles that you can not afford , when they know your budget from the start . These are some things that will help your long term care search start off on a good foot .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is A Retirement Plan Sponsored By An Employer ?
Generally an employer sponsored qualified retirement plan under ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . -RRB- can be a defined benefit or contribution plan . Most employer sponsored plans today are defined contributions plans like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- that permits pretax contributions , tax deferral accumulations and distributions taxed as ordinary income .
An employer sponsored retirement plan is a benefit of employment . It is designed to encourage loyalty among employees . This might be done with contributions on the part of the employer or may only be the facility for providing a place where employees can save for their own retirement . There can be a wide variety of plans available .
Employers are always searching for quality employees from the labor force . Offering employer sponsored qualified retirement plans can be a significant recruiting and retention feature of the company . A popular choice of employer sponsored retirement plans are defined contribution retirement plans . Some employers match a percentage of the employee 's contribution to enhance the retirement benefit .
There are employer sponsored retirement plans as well as individual retirement plans . One example of an employer sponsored retirement plan under ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 -RRB- is a defined contribution plan , where pretax contributions accumulate tax deferred and some employers match a portion of the contribution . Individuals can set up their own IRAs .
First create a financial profile that includes your timeline to retirement , your life expectancy , your tax bracket and your risk tolerance . Estimating timelines will help you frame your retirement planning . Knowing your tax bracket will help you decide whether to use a qualified or non qualified retirement plan . Determining your risk tolerance will also help your select the right investment product . You need to discover if your employer sponsors a retirement plan , especially if it offers matching contributions . This can help you decide whether to use an individual or employer sponsored retirement plan .
Choosing the retirement plan for yourself can be a daunting task , but here are a few factors that may assist you in your decision . First should you use a qualified or no qualified plans?Second , should you use your employer sponsored or individual retirement plan?If you are ina high tax bracket and your employer offers matching contributions , you should select a qualified employer sponsored retirement plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- .
Choosing the retirement plan for yourself can be a daunting task , but here are a few factors that may assist you in your decision . First should you use a qualified or no qualified plans?Second , should you use your employer sponsored or individual retirement plan?If you are ina high tax bracket and your employer offers matching contributions , you should select a qualified employer sponsored retirement plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . But if your tax bracket is minimal and you like more flexibility that a regulated qualified plan , a non qualified plan using indexed life insurance may be appropriate for you . These are just a couple of considerations to get you started .
A good question ! Portability in insurance is similar to portability regarding anything else . For example a portable radio is one that you can take with you to the beach or a friends house . The question of portability regarding insurance usually comes up when discussing employer sponsored insurance . In many if not most cases insurance that is purchased through an employer sponsored group plan is NOT portable . That is if you leave the company your insurance terminates . Some products such as Aflac supplemental health insurance ARE portable even when purchased through your employer on a payroll deduction . There are some employer sponsored life insurance plans that are portable , so you should ask your employer or the HR department what yours is .
An employer sponsored qualified retirement plan under ERISA , the Employee Retirement Income security Act of 1974 , is generally the largest sponsor of retirement plans . These types of retirement plans can be a defined benefit plan , but in today 's market , it is more likely a defined contribution plan using pretax dollars .
Non-qualified tax deferred annuities can be individually owned , jointly owned and owned by a qualified individual retirement account or employer sponsored qualified retirement account . In the case of a qualified individual retirement account or employer sponsored qualified retirement account , the ownership is individual , but for annuitization purposes can be joint annuitants .
Employer Sponsored Retirement Plan is generally an ERISA qualified plan that a business sponsors for their employees with employee tax deductible contributions and sometimes an employer contribution match . An example of such a plan is the popular 401k retirement plan offered by many corporations and small businesses alike .
Generally an employer sponsored qualified retirement plan under ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . -RRB- can be a defined benefit or contribution plan . Most employer sponsored plans today are defined contributions plans like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- that permits pretax contributions , tax deferral accumulations and distributions taxed as ordinary income .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
what is a defined benefit plan ? A defined benefit plan is an employer sponsored retirement plan that the employer bares all the risk of investment . A defined benefit plan provides an outcome for employees rather than a lump sum balancesubject to market risks.A defined benefit plan used to be the norm for retirement programs , now they arerare asmany employers have jumped to 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans which only obligate the employer to the original contribution . The shift of RISK falls completely on the employee .
Planning for retirement is planning for your lifestyle in your golden years ; you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your effective tax bracket and a life expectancy report so you can create a reasonable timeline . If youre younger than age 45 , you should consider retirement at age 70 because your life expectancy may be 20 to 25 years more if youre a nonsmoker and in good health . You need to determine if your employer sponsors a defined contribution plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , especially if the employer offers a contribution match . If your employer doesnt offer such a plan , you may want to consider a Roth IRA or Traditional IRA . If youre self-employed and you make six figure income , you may want to investigate SEPs . Some retirement plans are non-qualified using annuities and/or life insurance to fund their retirement . Once you perform your personal financial profile , you can begin the review process to determine how youll fund your retirement .
This is a tough question . How old are you ? What is your health ? And why are you taking the money out ? If you are older than 59 1/2 , you can request a distribution form from your plan sponsor or employer . The form will ask whether you want to take a single distribution or a series of systematic payments . If it is not going into a Rollover IRA , the sponsor usually withholds the taxes on your behalf and you would get the net amount paid to you either in a check or an EFT . If you are YOUNGER than 59 1/2 , there is a 10 % excise tax that is charged -LRB- premature withdrawal -RRB- by the IRS . So if you can , try and avoid withdrawing funds prior to your retirement and do a LOAN instead . That way you are paying yourself the interest on the loaned portion of the 401K funds , and not a bank . Depending on your plan , you may also be able to take out what they call `` in service '' distributions . These allow you to transfer your funds into IRA accounts and diversify your investments for retirement . And thanks to a recent IRS change , you can even move funds from your Retirement and create a guaranteed income stream -LRB- provided by the carrier that you purchase the product from -RRB- through a Deferred Income Annuity . Think of this like buying a defined benefit with your retirement assets that you can never outlive . I hope that this answers your question .
Generally speaking , a qualified retirement plan is one legislated by the government with tax advantaged features to attract American workers to save for retirement . One example is The Employee Retirement Income Security act of 1974 -LRB- ERISA -RRB- that addresses defined benefit and defined contribution plans . And one of the most popular employer sponsored defined contribution retirement plans is a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . Plan participants can make pretax contributions that accumulate tax deferred and some employers match a portion of the employee 's contribution . Of course distributions at retirement are taxed as ordinary income and there are penalties for distributions before age 59 1/2 .
You know , it sounds a little out of place , but there are reasons for why people lose their life insurance . Do any of these apply to you ? 1 . They didnt pay their premiums . 2 . They were covered under an employer-sponsored plan , and the employer stopped sponsoring that plan . 3 . They were covered under an association plan , and either the association stopped sponsoring the plan , or the carrier dropped the association .
You need to determine if your employer sponsors a qualified plan , If your employer sponsors a defined contribution plan like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and matches some portion of your contribution , you should participate in the plan . But if you need to start your own plan , consider an IRA or Roth IRA for tax deductible contributions . But perhaps the biggest issue is first creating a personal financial profile that includes a risk assessment analysis to assist you in selecting a product line to fund your plan . Keep in mind that your retirement date and your life expectancy are critical time line considerations as well .
Employer sponsored Disability Insurance is Disability Insurance that is provided to employees by the employer or business they work for , and governed by ERISA -LRB- the Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- . Employer sponsored disability insurance can be short term , long term , or a combination of short and long term disability coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Can I Do With My Life Insurance ?
It depends upon what type of life insurance you have . If its term or guaranteed universal life , then you options are limited to coverage or the sale of those polices in the settlement market depending on the date of issue , your age and life expectancy . If you have cash value permanent life insurance , you have the option to access the cash values via policy loans and maybe withdrawals tax free .
If you have a term life insurance policy , you have few options . The main thing is to keep paying it , or you will lose it after one month of nonpayment . You can change the beneficiary or owner , if you wish . You could convert it to a permanent policy , if it has a conversion option . If the premium is too high , you may be able to lower the face amount . If you have permanent life insurance , in addition to continuing to pay it , changing the beneficiary or owner , or opting for a lower face amount , you may be able to do a few other things . You may be able to quit paying on it and have a reduced paid up policy . You may be able to put in a lump sum of money so that the policy will stay in effect with no further payments . You could borrow from the cash value or surrender the policy . Contact your life insurance agent to see what possibilities exist with your life insurance policy .
I am not sure what exactly you mean by this question . There are many answers . I will give a few . Life insurance is meant primarily to provide a death benefit . Depending on the type of policy you may also have some living benefits however . Some policies provide accelerated death benefits for those who are diagnosed with a terminal illness . A Whole Life plan may have cash value you can borrow from if you have an emergency and need money . It also has non-forfeiture provisions that prevent you from losing the insurance completely if you cant pay the premium by utilizing the cash value that is in the policy to keep it in force . There are some companies who buy life insurance policies .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
At LifeQuotes.com we like to have applicants articulate why they want life insurance to make sure that we recommend the right policy from among our 35 life insurers . Important questions to answer are : Why do I think I need life insurance ? Who should get what if I die ? Who are my current dependents ? What is my current and future debt situation ? By when will I have no dependents in my life that I am responsible for ? What would my spouse do or live on if I died ?
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Much Disability Insurance Can I Have ?
Disability insurance companies are careful not to over-insure , as policy holders with too much coverage lack an incentive to return to work . Most policies will limit the amount of income replacement to two thirds of your gross income . They will also ask if you have any other form of coverage , and will want to limit the combination to less than 70 % . Many policies will also offset any benefit payments you might receive from state short term disability , and social security disability .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In order to figure out how much Disability Insurance you should have , you need to understand that Disability Insurance is based on your current income . Depending on how much you make , you may qualify for up to 70 % of your gross income . This said , you need to understand what your need may be , how much you can afford within your budget and design the policy to cover any partial disability . Without knowing your specific situation , I would start with the maximum benefit , and go from there . If you need help looking at some quotes , do not hesitate to contact me or your local insurance broker . Thank you for the question .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Often this question is approached by , how much can you afford ? I would like you to think of it as , How much can you afford to lose . I have been driving over 50 years . I have had one minor fender bender 46 years ago . Had I never purchased insurance -LRB- in California I have the option of posting a bond or cash -RRB- I would have saved approximately $ 90,000 . However , a recent accident involving a pedestrian struck in a cross walk resulted in a settlement of over $ 750,000 . I couldnt have afforded the settlement , so I paid the premiums . What can you afford to lose ? Buy the insurance that will protect you from those amounts that you can not afford to lose . If you can qualify for an umbrella consider limits in the $ 1-2 million range . In our lawsuit happy society that is not being overly cautious .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
You may have group disability insurance available to you through your employer , however , you will find generally find stronger coverage through an individual disability insurance plan . A disability is a sickness or injury which interferes in your ability to work and earn a living . In disability insurance , there 's 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST IMPORTANT factor to look at in a policy . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True own occupation is the best definition you can have . Gainful occupation is commonly seen in group policies and offers the least coverage . One of the drawbacks of group coverage is if your employment is terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual policy goes with you wherever you go and generally features stronger coverage and a better definition of disability -LRB- a true own occupation or modified own occupation definition -RRB- . You want to buy your disability insurance when you 're healthy - this type of coverage is much more in depth than life and health insurance . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may face an exclusion rider for the condition under a given policy or be postponed for the coverage until it 's resolved . Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance that has moving parts to policies . If you 're looking to apply for coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and have experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish and make the process as seemless as possible . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Will Health Insurance Pay For A Hot Tub ?
No , health insurance generally will not pay for a hot tub . I personally have never heard of a situation that would warrant a medical necessity for a private hot tub . Health insurance is designed to pay for Medically necessary costs and procedures . Unless your doctor can show the insurance company that a hot tub is a medically necessary item -LRB- which will be a hard fight -RRB- it will not be covered under any policy that I am aware of .
No , health insurance generally will not pay for a hot tub . I personally have never heard of a situation that would warrant a medical necessity for a private hot tub . Health insurance is designed to pay for Medically necessary costs and procedures . Unless your doctor can show the insurance company that a hot tub is a medically necessary item -LRB- which will be a hard fight -RRB- it will not be covered under any policy that I am aware of .
Homeowners insurance will cover a hot tub for the same perils of the policy as the rest of your property . If the hot tub is connected to your home this would fall in as part of your dwelling coverage . If the hot tub is free standing outside then this would fall under other structure coverage .
No . Your health insurance will not cover a hot tub . If you are trying to purchase a hot tub , you would be responsible for paying 100 % of the cost out of your own pocket . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You never have to accept the offer of an insurance adjuster . Most claims are paid on depreciated value . If replacement cost coverage is elected it covers only buildings and contents . Many things are specifically excluded . It appears that your adjuster does not consider your hot tub as a covered item for replacement coverage . That is his opinion .
Unfortunately , no , Medicare will not help pay for a walk-in tub . They are not considered to be a durable medical equipment -LRB- a DME -RRB- item . They 're generally viewed as a convenience item for an individual since they 're available to the general public and anyone who wants one can buy them .
A flood which isdefinedby FEMA WEBSITELINK s not covered by renters insurance or any property insurance for that matter . Aseparateflood policy must be purchased to protect yourself from this peril . However if a pipe bursts in the home or water overflows from a tub or sink there may be coverage . Talk to your local agent about specifcoverageof your renters policy .
As long as were not talking about a flood your homeowners insurance policy will cover most water damage . Damage would include for example but not limited to a water or steam pipe suddenly bursting and damaging your dwelling . Wind driven rain would be another example or even overflow of tub , toilet , sink , or washer . The damage must be sudden and accidental .
Generally speaking , the coverage provided by a Tenants ' Policy is vey similar to that provided by a Homeowners ' Policy . The main difference is that with regard to property coverage , a Renters ' Policy protects YOUR belongings while a Homeowners ' protectes both the home and personal property . Remember that someone else owns your building or unit so they would have coverage for their interests . Water camage is a covered peril in both , though there can certainly be some differences . In a Renters Policy , if rain comes in through an open window , the damage caused to your couch , for example would be covered by your policy . If on the other hand , you made a mistakle and left the water running in the tub and it overflowed , not only would your policy provide coverage for your damages , but the liability portion would provide coverage for your landlord 's interest .
I believe that the best way to start is by talking with your Insurance Professional . You will need to provide the property location of course , but also some additional basic information . Things like the year of construction and type of home -LRB- Ranch , Colonial , Contemporary , for example -RRB- . Additional information like the size and style of the home , for example , is it standard construction or custom ? Is the home alarmed and are their special features like a finished basement , fire places , or special fixtures like a jacuzzi tub or sauna as examples . Let your Insurance Professional know also if you know of any recent upgrades to things like electrical , plumbing or heating/air conditioning systems or if a new roof has recently been put on as these may earn discounts if the home is older .
If you are denied Life Insurance , then you are not covered meaning if you die , no benefit will be paid to your heirs . There are 3 basic reasons a life insurance policy will be declined : 1 . You health is not good ! I am talking more than just smoking or a little overweight . Perhaps there is a history of heart attack , cancer , etc. 2 . You have risky hobbies such as skydiving , hang gliding , rock climbing , scuba diving , etc. 3 . You are in the Military and are deployed to a `` hot zone '' which the insurance companies determine or perhaps you are vacationing in a `` hot zone '' . This said , all companies have different underwriting . I would recommend talking to a broker who can shop around for you . Fill out a questionnaire which all the details so different underwriters can review and see how these companies will rate you .
Homeowners insurance does not cover the replacement of an old hot water heater but it MAY cover damage caused by a leaking hot water heater as long as the home owner is not found to have neglected the normal maintence of his home which does include replacing your water heater before it rusts through .
The homeowners policy will provide coverage for damage caused by a ruptured hot water heater . It will not replace the hot water heater , itself . It is very important to get assistance urgently as water damage never improves , it only gets worse . It is particularly critical if carpets or wood floors are involved .
The military can provide options to obtaining Life Insurance and will encourage you to get all your affairs in order including Life Insurance before deployment . From what I understand , there is a small cost to this coverage . Mainstream companies which the general public has access to usually will not provide coverage to those military personnel who are deployed to what we call `` hot zones '' . Every Life Insurance Company has an updated list which is considered `` hot '' and will tend to decline coverage , or rate it higher as the likelihood of being killed is much higher .
On top of the other answers , I wanted to add another reason life insurance might be denied . If you travel or are in the military which takes you to what is referred to a `` hot zone '' , then you may be denied or an exclusion may be made however it usually is a denial . Even if you are considering vacation down to say Mexico , there are places in that country which companies have on there hot list . Be sure to ask your agent or company if you are covered when you place to leave the states .
Health insurance does make sense from the stand point of protecting yourself from financial loss due to an unexpected illness or accident . The hot debate now is `` Does Obamacare make sense ? '' That conversation still does n't have an answer . As an agent who works for his clients I still advise each and every family to purchase the best coverage they can afford to make sure they are n't regretting it down the road .
Boilers are a specialized form of insurance and include inspection services . The homeowners policy will cover a loss that results from a sudden release of water or steam . The vessel is the issue here and a homeowners policy does not cover the boiler . The same is true of a residential hot water heater . The policy will pay for loss as the result of a failure ; however , it will not replace the appliance .
That is a great question ! In the spectrum of life insurance policies , there are policies that come with lower risk and higher guarantees , and there are those that may have higher values , but come with more risk and less guarantees . On the low risk end are traditional whole life policies . You pay a set premium for a specific face value , and as long as you pay your premiums , it 's almost certain that you will see that face value paid when the insured passes . Moving up the spectrum a little are term policies . These policies also have set face value amounts , and cover only a specified amount of time . The payments may or may not remain constant . they might increase or decrease as the term nears completion . The only way these policies pay out is if the insured passes while the term period is still in effect . On the high risk end of the spectrum are the adjustable , variable , or universal policies.Though they may carry any of these terms in the name , the basic working chassis is the same . With these policies your risk to gain or lose is not guaranteed . You basically play the market within your policy with the funds that are in it . If your investments do well , then your policy may make money , remain solvent , and have steady premium payments for you . If the market is n't doing so hot , like lately , or your investment choices were n't the best , your policy may go belly up , or require higher premium payments from you to keep it solvent . The guarantees on this type of policy are generally minimal , and the balance of the risk is on you , not the insurer . They will have some pretty good looking numbers when trying to sell it to you , so if you are looking to purchase one of these , please be very sure that you understand exactly what you 're offered , and what is guaranteed , okay ? I appreciate you asking , and if you 'd like more information , please do n't hesitate to contact me , okay ? I will go on record now as saying that I do not advise my clients to purchase this type of policy , unless they are completely comfortable with the possibility that they may lose money , or pay more than they might have wanted to . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! You will need to look at your policy to see . Some insurers will include mold damage , others will not . Here in the hot and humid south , mold insurance is a rider , or a separate coverage as a rule , since mold is so prevalent . Contact your agent , and find out whether yours does . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
This has been a hot topic in California . Apparently , an insurance company can not refuse to offer comprehensive coverage on a salvage titled car . I suspect that this coverage isnt available in other states but there doesnt seem to be a provision to deny coverage in California .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Can I Change My Home Insurance At Any Time ?
Unless you have some sort of special agreement with your lender or other party , homeowners insurance is an at will product . This means that you can normally change carriers at any time that you wish . Find a local agent and carrier that you are comfortable with and verify that you are getting the coverages that you need or want before changing carriers or agents .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com today , and here 's our question : is converting my term life insurance policy to a permanent policy a good idea ? Well remember , most people buy their term insurance because they 're buying it for a time certain event 10 years , 15 years , 20 years . Sometimes life changes and all of the sudden liabilities and obligations that I thought were going to be terminal now become permanent . I want to make sure when I buy my term insurance contract that I have convertibility and that that convertibility allows me to go to a really good permanent portfolio , so all of the sudden if I need to change and I need to make a maneuver , I may have to convert my term to perm because my obligations and liabilities have changed . That 's why you need to look at a good term contract that has convertibility options and a good window to convert to a good quality permanent policy . Well , that 's our consumer quest ion for today . If you have any questions just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Ideally changing your homeowners insurance from one carrier to another would be best on the anniversary date of the renewal of the policy . In other words , if the policy runs from 7/5/2014 - 7/5/2015 , ideally changing your policy on 7/5/2015 would be best . However , there a number of factors involved . As a licensed independent agent , I recommend reviewing your current coverage once a year with your agent to be sure you have the proper coverage . At times , carriers go through rate changes and it may be favorable to change to another carrier . Understand however , that when you change your home insurance , you should strongly consider changing you auto along with it to the same company . Most carriers offer substantial discounts for the multipolicy discount of having both home and auto coverage with the same carrier . The second reason it is best to change on your anniversary is most times your home insurance is rolled into your monthly mortgage amount through an escrow account . Whenever you do change carriers , the new carrier will have to be billed , the old carrier has to refund the escrow amount , and the new check forwarded to the new carrier . It is easiest and least confusion , if that is done at the annual period . With all that being said , if during the middle of the year you find it prudent to change your homeowner coverage to another carrier , it can be done , you just need to be aware and work with a knowledgeable agent to be sure the transition runs smoothly .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I live in Georgia also and have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
The key word in this question is `` cover '' . All life insurance can be used toward that purpose if the beneficiary chooses to use it that way . Policies can be made with a Funeral Home as the beneficiary but only one kind of policy will answer the question of `` will it cover '' . When I first entered the insurance profession in 1957 we sold a $ 1,000 or $ 2,000 ordinary -LRB- permanent , whole -RRB- life policy for a person wanting funeral expense coverage . As I increased my knowledge in the insurance industry I went to including a `` Final Expense '' amount in the practice of total planning of a persons insurance needs . At that time we figured $ 10,000 sufficient to meet the needs of final hospital expenses , taxes , burial , etc. . It was not until I was Executive Vice President of a company that was sold to a company that wrote burial insurance policies through the funeral home . I became licensed with the new company and learned , at a much older age , that there is only one policy that can REALLY say it will cover funeral costs at the persons death . That policy is available through funeral homes , it is an increasing whole life policy that the funeral home accepts for the purchase of a funeral at a specific time and then guarantees to give that equivalent funeral whenever the person dies without any further cost except some expense that might be beyond those spelled out in the contract . I began to teach classes for CE on this kind of policy for our state and for many insurance agencies . This is a completely different policy that can be of great benefit to a local independent agent working with a local funeral home . As I began to teach about this type of Life Insurance I found most Life Insurance agents had never heard of it or had been sold against it by companies writing supposed , last expense , death benefit policies . I have now written this type of policy for almost 20 years and the families of the deceased have nothing but praise for a properly planned REAL Funeral Policy . At 81 years old the death benefit of my funeral policy now exceeds the death benefit of the first policy I bought for total family protection . If I am blessed with a few more years it may equal what I used to think was a huge Life Insurance policy . I am still writing these policies on my friends . I have learned one thing over the years ! In the insurance business never close your mind to a type of policy until you have totally studied it yourself rather than being sold a bill of goods by a company that may not have the policy you are trying to learn about . Worry about that client , first and foremost , and do the best job you possibly can for that individual by increasing your knowledge of this business . I have covered some of the aspects of this policy in my recently published second edition of `` The Prophets Dollar '' , available on Amazon .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Well sometimes there can be certain people that will need a term policy because of where they have focused their budget in the past , over all it does n't fit every persons goals but will be cheaper . I will use my story to answer the question when I purchased my policy I realized that it would take some focus on my part even working with a very knowledgeable agent I already knew just like most families we wait until about 45 -55 years of age to purchase what we should have purchased in our 20 's in the first place and then we start shopping to find out wow this is not cheap but it is now or never . So $ 300 a month was not cheap for me but I knew it 's now or never so I made a commitment to my family it 's now I want leave them with this burden it 's just a decision just like the one that caused you to make the decision to wait . now where did that come from procrastination and that can be inherited by your children so I would say change your focus change your life .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Keep My Ex Wife On My Car Insurance ?
That is a great question ! The better question though , is why would you want to ? I could maybe , possibly , barely , almostsee why if she were still driving the car ; if she had policies that bundled with yours and kept your rates low , or if she were making the payments . But she is n't going to be legally obligated to you anymore , and if she 's not going to be driving the car , probably is going to stop paying , drop you from her policies , and not care too much if your car gets a new dent or scratch . I 'm not suggesting in any way that your Ex is in any kind of way a bad person , or doing anything wrong . That is just the way it is . It may be better to just let that one go , and let her find a policy that will work best for her . If you 'd like to discuss this privately , please contact me , okay ? Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Okay it is time for lawyer to answer this question , not an insurance agent . With that disclaimer made , in my experience , I have heard of a beneficiary being contested . One of my former clients had gotten a divorce and then remarried , having never informed me as to his change in marital status , no changes were ever made to his life policy . He then suddenly passed away , and his new wife called me to file a claim on his policy . I realized then that she was not a named beneficiary , his ex-wife was . Well , to make matters more interesting his ex-wife called and asked if the policy was still in force . I helped the named beneficiary -LRB- ex-wife -RRB- file a claim for the death benefit . His new wife told me that she was going to contest this in court and had a hired a lawyer . I notified the insurance company as to the problems , and they held off on paying the claim until a resolution was reached . The case never made it to court and the ex-wife split the proceeds equally with the new wife . So does that mean that it can be contested ? At the time I was told by the Insurance company 's attorney , that they could be , but that it was rarely done . He also said that between a will and a beneficiary provision , a will was easier to break than a beneficiary provision on a life policy .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
Life Insurance passes by contract law . So if I have a $ 500,000 policy upon my death , assuming my wife is my beneficiary , the funeral home provides a `` death certificate '' to my wife who then files a claim with my insurance company and the proceeds is not tied up in my estate .
Typically , an ex-wife and ex-husband can not be listed on your health insurance . Usually , a health insurer allows you to have family members on a contract . There may be a short period of time when they can be covered following an official divorce , but generally not long-term . The ex-spouse can apply for coverage on a separate policy .
Does your child need life insurance ? Well there will be an answer for everybody and they may not be the same . I purchased life insurance on my children . Here are a few reasons why ... . if one of my children were to die , I do n't think I would be able to go straight back to work on Monday as if nothing happened . I would n't want to have the price of the headstone and service costs get into the pain my wife and I would be experiencing . Imagine telling your wife `` that costs too much '' for the headstone she wants for your child . I also bought for positive reasons too . I purchased whole life so they have permanent insurance working hard at a low cost for them . They have solid cash values and life insurance to take into adulthood .
If you and/or your children would suffer financially by the death of your ex wife , you would likely have the insurable interest needed to take out a policy on her . She would need to sign the application and take an exam , if an exam is required . Many people use No Exam policies when procuring life insurance on ex spouses as it is much quicker and less stressful .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
California is one of five community property states . In addition to the insured signing the application , the signature of both the husband and wife are required if they own a policy where the beneficiary is someone other than the two of them . For example , if I buy a life policy on my life and name my sister as beneficiary , my wife also has to sign the application .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
If you are referring to a room mate situation , then it would be wise for each person to have renter 's insurance . If a husband & wife , then it is not needed on each person . Insurance is based on an insurable interest . For example if I had a room mate , my room mate has no insurable interest in my stuff or my liability . There is one other option , the renter 's policy could be endorsed to insure the room mate as an additional insured . The room mate 's contents would not be covered , but at least the room mate would have liability coverage . -LRB- see some of my other answers regarding renter 's insurance -RRB- .
Yes , you can . There are two ways of doing it : 1 . With the cooperation of the insured . This means that you have some personal or business connection . You would sustain a loss in the event of his unfortunate death ; he knows it ; and would be willing to have us life insured for your benefit . Any mainstream carrier would offer coverage assuming he qualifies . 2 . Without the cooperation of the insured . This is very tricky but can be done . There are excess-market carriers that will provide a policy without the insured knowing about it , under very extreme circumstances . One example is a husband who is just being a real bad guy in a divorce , and is refusing to support his ex-wife and kids .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
USAA was formed by military officers for military officers and enlisted personnel . Anyone who is currently in the military , or retired with an honorable discharge can join . There are ways to join if you are n't or were n't in the military . These are : One of your parents was in the military and has purchased an auto or home policy ; You are a widow/widower or former -LRB- unremarried -RRB- spouse of a member who had purchased auto or home insurance ; Attending one of the service academies or in advanced ROTC at a college/university . I 'm not sure how many generations a membership can be passed down . I have a membership through my father-in-law who served in the Navy during WWII , and my son has a membership through me and my wife . I think a membership can only be passed down two generations , but I do n't know that for sure . It 's a great organization . If you are eligible , I strongly recommend you join . They have lots of great benefits besides insurance .
In my work with funeral homes I have seen MANY cases where someone thought that their will would redirect the proceeds of their life insurance . Just a couple of months ago I was involved with a death where a man died and had been married to his 2nd wife for over 20-years . He and his 1st wife were bitter enemies . But he never changed the beneficiary on his life insurance policy . The entire $ 50,000 that the 2nd wife was expecting all went to his 1st wife . She was nice enough to pay the funeral expenses for him -LRB- she did n't have to . -RRB- But the remaining money all went to her . This is a very common error and is another example of why everyone needs a good local life insurance agent that they review things with every few years . Life insurance should not be bought and then thrown in a drawer and forgot about . If there is a living named beneficiary , the life insurance will not be affected by the will or the estate settlement .
Whether or not you can keep life insurance on your ex husband will be up to you , your ex husband , and the court . The life insurance company does not have a say in whether you keep your policy on your ex husband . If you own the policy , you are the one who makes those decisions .
Is Life Insurance really worth it ? That depends entirely on the individual involved . For some the idea of protecting their family if they do n't make it home some night is worth a great deal . For others not so much , as it depends on your relationships in life . Even as single young man , I bought life insurance . Why ? cause it was `` worth '' it to me to make sure that my mom could deal with the clean up of the mess I left behind without having to spend the money she worked hard for herself . It was `` worth '' it to me to make a terrible situation that my mom might have to face not a financial hardship at the same time . Later on , it was `` worth '' it to me to have coverage for my wife and kids . This is really a personal answer for each person . I ca n't tell anybody why it 's worth it to them , that has to be their own choice .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Do They Check For When Applying For Life Insurance ?
When you apply for a life insurance policy , the life insurance company will nearly always check your driving record , pharmacy record , and MIB , even if you are applying for a policy that does not require a life insurance exam . They are checking for a suspended license , numerous traffic tickets , DUI 's , medications , and past health conditions the showed up when you applied for insurance in the past . If you are required to take a life insurance exam , they will check your blood and urine for HIV , diabetes , cholesterol , liver disease , other health conditions , and the presence of nicotine or drug metabolites . They will also weigh and measure you , take your blood pressure and pulse , and depending on your age and amount you apply for , may check for heart disease through use of a resting EKG or stress test .
When you apply for a life insurance policy , the life insurance company will nearly always check your driving record , pharmacy record , and MIB , even if you are applying for a policy that does not require a life insurance exam . They are checking for a suspended license , numerous traffic tickets , DUI 's , medications , and past health conditions the showed up when you applied for insurance in the past . If you are required to take a life insurance exam , they will check your blood and urine for HIV , diabetes , cholesterol , liver disease , other health conditions , and the presence of nicotine or drug metabolites . They will also weigh and measure you , take your blood pressure and pulse , and depending on your age and amount you apply for , may check for heart disease through use of a resting EKG or stress test .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test If you 're an older individuals -LRB- e.g. age 55 -RRB- , some carriers may also ask for an EKG to be completed with the other exam requirements . If you 're a senior -LRB- e.g. age 70 -RRB- , some carriers may ask you to complete a mature assessment -LRB- congnitive and physical movement testing - e.g. memory tests , walk a distance , etc. -RRB- . Exams typically take no more than a half hour or so and can be completed in the privacy of your own home -LRB- some people prefer their work place which is also acceptable -RRB- . You do n't have to go to a doctor 's office or a clinic to have the exams done . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . Please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
An important thing to know is what they do n't ask you but do check . For instance , insurance companies will check : Your MIB -LRB- medical insurance bureau -RRB- to see if you have applied with other companies and if you have been declined . You MVD report -LRB- Motor Vehicle Department -RRB- to see if you have any outstanding tickets , felonies , or dui 's . Your Pharmacy Report to see what medications you have been prescribed by Doctors . Make sure you answer the above questions honestly on the applications as the underwriters will be checking this information .
Yes - life insurance companies can check medical records when you apply for coverage , regardless of whether you 're applying for a fully underwritten program or a no-exam life insurance program . The reason they can do this is because you are granting them access when you apply for coverage by signing a HIPAA authorization form . HIPAA was created to help protect the confidentiality and security of healthcare information . The HIPAA form authorizes the carrier to obtain needed medical information for the purposes of underwriting your program . Typically , the carriers may only order a copy of the records when you apply for a certain level of coverage or length of coverage because of the expense involved in doing so . For small policies -LRB- e.g. $ 25,000 , $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 , etc. -RRB- , carriers will generally feature more relaxed underwriting and have fewer requirements . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your program or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you apply to buy insurance , most insurance companies will take your credit into consideration . It is considered a `` soft hit '' . It will show up on your credit history that there was an inquiry , it does n't change or effect your credit . So whatever your credit score was before you apply for insurance is what it will be after applying . To my knowledge , California is one of the states that mandates insurance companies not take a person 's credit history into consideration when rating the premium . You can check with an insurance agent or broker licensed in your state to see if your state as the same rules .
Life insurance quotes are an estimation of the premiums you would pay for a given life insurance coverage structure -LRB- face amount and term length -RRB- . However , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . So if you run a quote at the most preferred rates and have n't factored in your height/weight , medications used , medical conditions , family medical history , tobacco usage , driving history issues , participation in extreme/hazardous activities , and a number of other factors , then the quote figures you ran are pretty much useless as they do not represent an accurate picture for the proposed coverage . The risk classification is the MOST IMPORTANT part of any quote an insurance agent gives you because the risk classification determines the premiums for the coverage . The final risk class a carrier approves you at after underwriting your policy will tell you what premiums the carrier will require for the coverage to be active . Many individuals like to see quotes with the most preferred rates -LRB- preferred plus risk class -RRB- as they are the cheapest cost and then they end up thinking that 's what they should get -LRB- and if they do n't get it , then they will forget the entire process and not even bother securing any coverage at all -RRB- . What you apply for is not always what you get - not everyone qualifies for the best rates . For example , if you have a major medical condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack , diabetic , had cancer , etc. -RRB- and the quote that was ran was for a preferred plus risk class , you 're wasting your time applying for it because every carrier is going to offer a higher risk class -LRB- and therefore require higher premiums -RRB- for the coverage -LRB- or possibly decline or postpone you for coverage depending on the details of the medical history -RRB- . This is why it 's critical to work with an experienced , knowledgeable , independent life insurance broker who knows the right questions to ask and can shop the case among multiple companies so they can give you the most accurate quotes up front that represent a realistic expectation of what you can expect to pay for the desired life insurance program . An important note : You NEVER want to just apply to a bunch of companies to see what sticks as this actually works against you because it 's a red flag to insurance companies when they complete the MIB check during underwriting -LRB- Medical Information Bureau - every carrier checks this because if you were declined by other companies , they want to know why -RRB- . You want to have your best -LRB- and most accurate -RRB- estimate up front so you get it right the first time so you can get the best rates for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . When enrolling under a special enrollment period , the effective date would be the 1st of the following month after you apply . The effective date of coverage when applying during the general enrollment period will be July 1 of the year you apply . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Is your friend in business as a `` yard man '' or landscape maintenance ? If so your friend needs to have liability insurance to cover any damage they may do to you or your property and their own health insurance to cover any injuries to them self . If it 's just a friend doing a favor for you you should check your homeowners insurance to see how much and what is covered in case of an accident . Or if you have an umbrella or property & casualty policy check to see what it will cover . In other words check what you already have before deciding if you need more .
The reason is just liked mentioned above . To see if they will get paid and how responsible are you . I have this questioned asked when someone is looking for full coverage and what surprises is the everyone check your credit . Buying an I phone ? Buying a car ? Leasing a Car ? Renting an Apartment ? Buying a home or condo ? Asking for a Loan ? . So out of everything i just mentioned the only thing that pays out in the event of an occurrence is Insurance . So why would n't they check your credit ? Remember when your asking for a quote online or over the phone and they say `` we have to run a financial responsibility check '' that 's a soft check that the company is doing . Almost every carrier that i represent now and have represented across five states in the past check credit . My suggestion to you is let the agent or company know if that the issue so they can tell you upfront if you qualify or not . Thank you and good luck .
When you apply for life insurance you sign a consent form for the company to check your Medical History . Usually they will only check with the Medical Information Bureau , which is a health database similar to a credit agency but health related . As long as the information on the application coincides with the information in the MIB report , many companies will go no further , however should they feel it necessary they can check with your doctor and obtain medical records .
People who participate in high risk activities or have impaired health conditions often are charged much higher premiums for life insurance , whether they are applying for term or permanent coverage . The price that you pay is determined by your age , the requested amount of coverage , and risk classification . If the carrier offers a substandard/table-rating for the coverage , the premiums will usually be based off of the standard risk class with an extra 25 % increase for each extra letter assigned -LRB- the 25 % figure can vary by carrier - e.g. some may use 17 % , etc. -RRB- . For example , a Table B rating would cost the standard rate plus 50 % -LRB- B = 2 tables -RRB- , a Table D rating would cost double the standard rate -LRB- D = 4 tables -RRB- , etc. . Insurance companies may also look at assigning a flat extra rating with a specified cost per thousand dollars of insurance -LRB- such as $ 5.00 per $ 1,000 of coverage -RRB- . Flat extras may be applied for only a few years , or for the life of the policy and are more commonly assigned for high-risk activities . Table-ratings are more commonly given for high-risk health conditions . I often also see many people just apply for a bunch of companies at the same time because they 're a high-risk individual . DO NOT do this ! . Applying for coverage with more than one company at the same time could hurt your chances of securing a policy . It is in your best interest to find out before applying what the most likely offer will be from 10-15 different companies so that you know what to expect and know that you are getting the best possible offer . I highly recommend working with an independent agent who can look at multiple companies for you - trying to get that information can be very difficult to do on your own . This is the exact field my group specializes in and would be happy to be of assistance with your program .
Here are a few guidelines for applying for life insurance . If applying for Term or Permanent insurance that is medically underwritten , you can fill out a long application with all your information , or you can often do a phone interview directly with the life insurance company to complete the application . You will then be scheduled for an exam in your home or other place of your choice . When you are approved and the policy is received , you have a month to look over the policy before deciding whether to keep it . If applying for a No Exam policy , you may do the entire application on the phone with your agent , sign it digitally , and have a policy within days . You usually need to have a checking account so they can draft the first premium . With all life insurance policies , you will need to provide contact information and Social Security Number . For most , you will provide health details and permission for the life insurance company to order your medical records if needed . Your information is protected and kept private .
If there is any written medical record of your smoking , like your doctor 's chart notes for example , chances are it will be in the MIB records . When you apply for insurance , you grant permission for an insurance company to check your medical records and other history and they may come across it there . Most all companies , if you are looking for best price will also test for nicotine in your system as part of the exam process . Those companies that do n't test , just factor it into the price . So you pay like you do smoke in those cases or somewhere close to . One thing to keep in mind if you decide to miss the right answer when it comes to smoking is that some states refuse to let insurance companies settle a claim at a smoker rate . They have blocked insurance companies from paying the lesser claim and require the insurance company just to return premium . In the case of smoking , these states even waive the two year contestability window . Always check for any special state conditions when signing off on an application .
Can a life insurance company check medical records ? The answer is yes and they normally do as part of the underwriting process . Usually a company checks your health history and also takes blood and urine to check your current health too . Are there companies that do n't do this ? Yes there are . However , do not expect the cost of coverage to be low in those cases . The fewer questions an insurance company asks , the higher the premium .
First , check with your college 's office of student affairs or administration and see if they have a student health insurance plan . Due to the requirements of ObamaCare many of these plans have been cancelled or are being phased out but some do still exist . Next , you can be covered as a dependent on your parent 's health insurance policy until age 26 so if you have recently lost or will be losing coverage when you start school you could possibly be added onto their plan . Regarding true major medical individual health insurance you are pretty well locked out until the next open enrollment period starting on November 15th and the earliest you could be covered would be January 1 , 2015 . This is unless you have what is called a change of life status event -LRB- marriage , divorce , child birth or adoption , losing other coverage -RRB- in which case you have a 60-day time frame to apply for individual health insurance coverage . If you are in good health and coverage for any pre-existing health conditions is not a major concern for you then the best solution for immediate coverage would be to apply for a short term medical insurance policy . These policies are pretty affordable and depending upon the insurance carrier they may issue a policy that runs for a period just short of one year and you can often reapply for coverage . If you reside in Tennessee , Arkansas or Mississippi contact me and I 'll be happy to help you out with this . If you reside in another state seek out a health insurance broker or go online and do a search for Short Term Medical . Assurant Health and United Healthcare/Golden Rule have pretty good short term policies and , of course , you would want to check with the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan in your state . Other than Medicaid that pretty well sums up your options as a student .
It depends on many factors as to whether you may qualify for life insurance . The most common things that an underwriter will look at when you apply for life insurance is age , sex , current health , health history , residence , occupation , net worth , income and life style . There are typically 14 rating classes of insurance to determine premium from Best Preferred to Table 10 . If you exceed table 10 , you will probably be declined . There are life insurance carriers that offer low face amounts at guaranteed acceptance . just be sure to fully understand these types of policies , which pay a graduated amount over time . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market and find out health risk before you ever apply for coverage . This can save you from receiving a MIB hit . Medical Information Bureau is checked by all personal insurance companies you apply to and once the mark is registered , it can follow you the rest of your life , so just be careful .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Definition Of Universal Life Insurance ?
Universal life insurance is a type of permanent life insurance program that features a flexible premium structure.It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making itmuch less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value . It 's ideal foranyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value -LRB- the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy -RRB- . You can guarantee benefits for up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A type of flexible permanent life insurance offering the low-cost protection of term life insurance as well as a savings element -LRB- like whole life insurance -RRB- which is invested to provide a cash value buildup . The death benefit , savings element and premiums can be reviewed and altered as a policyholder 's circumstances change . In addition , unlike whole life insurance , universal life insurance allows the policyholder to use the interest from his or her accumulated savings to help pay premiums .
Universal Life insurance is an adjustable life insurance policy that has features of both Term and Permanent Insurance . The Term life insurance part provides pure insurance protection and a guaranteed death benefit for the length of time chose . The Permanent part provides cash value that can be used for loans , pay premiums , or increase the death benefit .
Universal life insurance is a permanent morality product that can be used for protection and income . It has a flexible feature that allows the policy owner to modify premium and/or level/increasing death benefit amounts . It generally has two sets of rates in the policy : current company practice and contractual guarantees .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
What to look for in Disability Insurance ? While there are many options to consider with disability insurance , a `` good '' disability policy comes down to one defining sentence . The most important thing is `` the definition of what disability IS . '' You see payment from a disability plan all comes down to what qualifies as a disability based on the definition of disability in the contract -LRB- policy -RRB- . If it is not simple and straight forward in this definition , you might want to look elsewhere . Pretty much beyond the first couple sentences about the definition of disability in a DI policy are terms where they take away from the definition , they exclude and make exceptions . The best policies are straight forward without a lot of fluff when it comes to that definition . And with a disability policy , words are everything .
Universal life insurance can be variable or fixed . They are simply two different types of Universal Life . Here are the basic definitions : Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- is a form of life insurance that can build cash value . The cash value can be invested in separate accounts -LRB- similar to mutual funds -RRB- and the owner of the policy gets to choose which separate accounts are chosen , within the scope of what that particular product offerings are . The word `` variable '' refers to the fact the owner can invest in accounts that vary in value such as stocks and bonds . This variable component results in the cash value in your VUL increasing above or decreasing below what you put in . Universal Life -LRB- UL -RRB- is a form of permanent life insurance where the excess in premium payments are credited to the cash value of the policy . If the cash value is referenced against a stock index such as the S&P 500 , it is called an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . An IUL does not put your money in the market but rather references the performance of that market over a measured period of time -LRB- such as a year -RRB- and credits you with interest if the referenced index has increased . Typically , the cash value of an IUL will not decrease as the result of that market declining - they would simply not credit your cash value account with interest for that particular year .
Your question , `` What are the Advantages and Disadvantages of Life Insurance '' is a good starting point of inquiry . However there are several different types of life insurance and some additional options of the kinds of providers . I would say that the universal advantage that all the types of life insurance have is that they will pay a cash benefit to the beneficiaries of the policy that has a much greater value than it 's monetary cost . That is - as long as the policy is in force , and if the policy is a `` Universal '' life policy that the premiums must have been kept up with the pace of the increasing `` cost of insurance '' . And that 's what I hate about `` Universal '' life policies and would definitely count that as a DISadvantage . The greatest Advantages all around are achieved with Participating Whole Life policies with Mutual companies . The only thing that could be considered a disadvantage in these policies would be the higher premiums paid compared with Term policies . But that 's like comparing carrots to Filet Mignon . WHole life policies carry a much greater benefit -LRB- face/death value -RRB- than their cost . They also accumulate tax-free Cash Value that may be used , tax-free and even provide an income for retirement years . Participating Whole Life with Mutual companies are also eligible for Dividends in addition to the Guaranteed tax-free compounding interest paid to the cash value . And as long as the premiums are paid as agreed the policy will never expire . And the premiums will never increase . Also with these participating policies your benefit amount may increase over the life of the policy . Term and Universal policies do expire and that would be a disadvantage . With Term policies there is never a cash value , and with Universal policies there can be a cash value that grows for a number of years , but then it will usually be devoured by the increasing ` cost of insurance ' . All disadvantages . For more information see WEBSITELINK
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Universal Life Insurance with a no lapse guarantee has some of the lowest premiums in permanent coverage . That is partly because you can buy UL that has almost no cash value . Therefore , most of your premium is going to purchase death protection . On the other hand , Universal Life Insurance can be used to create a lot of cash value , so that it can be used for expenses or retirement income . This is especially true with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life . Obviously , this premium will be much higher . Your age , health , and policy features all also come into play in calculating the cost of Universal Life Insurance . This is definitely one of those products you do n't want to purchase without some professional guidance . It is impossible to even compare two UL policies unless you understand what you are comparing .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are several different types of life insurance available . Term Insurance , Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are the main types . Term life insurance will be the least expensive but it also offers the least flexibility in many ways . Term is just that - a definitive length of time . If you buy 10 year term and you die 10 years and one week later , it pays your beneficiaries nothing . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime with little or no cash build-up inside the policy . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life can have significant cash build-up inside the policy which can be accessed through policy loans . This can be part of your strategy on paying for college , buying something major in your life or supplementing your retirement income . The cost of life insurance is determined by the amount of coverage desired , age , gender , medical history and the results of a paramedical exam . There is no cost to you for applying or for the paramedical exam - the insurance company covers those costs for you . By way of example , a non-smoking 25 year old female in excellent health , rated Preferred Best can get $ 250,000 of 20 year term for about $ 135 per year . I recommend you contact a knowledgeable , independent life insurance agent who can explain the different types of life insurance in more detail and help determine which is most appropriate for your needs . An independent agent will be able to let you pick from dozens of insurance companies available .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What is an example of a Disability Insurance Company ? While I use several , my primary choice is Berkshire through Guardian life insurance company . The reason I use this particular company is the definition of disability that they use I feel is one of the best still available for the insured . They are neither the cheapest nor the most expensive . It is just their definition of disability is short sweet and complete . I have found too many words in a definition often water the definition down , which can make payment a bit harder to get . Short and sweet , what is and what is n't , no laundry list of conditions to meet to collect . That is why I use them primarily .
There 's many companies that offer disability insurance such as Guardian , MetLife , Assurity , Standard , Principal , just to name a few . The DEFINITION OF DISABILITY is the single most important factor when determining which disability insurance policy to apply for . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What disability insurance should I get ? The one that gives you the best definition of `` disability '' . The definition is everything with these types of policies . A life insurance policy , pretty much you 're dead , they pay . With disability insurance , it comes down to the definition of disability to determine if the plan pays or not . The best definition of disability will usually be very short and straight forward because pretty much after the first couple sentences , the additional text is telling you what will change your coverage . A lot of words in this case is n't good for the consumer .
You may have group disability insurance available to you through your employer , however , you will find generally find stronger coverage through an individual disability insurance plan . A disability is a sickness or injury which interferes in your ability to work and earn a living . In disability insurance , there 's 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST IMPORTANT factor to look at in a policy . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True own occupation is the best definition you can have . Gainful occupation is commonly seen in group policies and offers the least coverage . One of the drawbacks of group coverage is if your employment is terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual policy goes with you wherever you go and generally features stronger coverage and a better definition of disability -LRB- a true own occupation or modified own occupation definition -RRB- . You want to buy your disability insurance when you 're healthy - this type of coverage is much more in depth than life and health insurance . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may face an exclusion rider for the condition under a given policy or be postponed for the coverage until it 's resolved . Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance that has moving parts to policies . If you 're looking to apply for coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and have experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish and make the process as seemless as possible . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I always say yes because it 's a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . The way I look at disability insurance is it protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the coverage is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the MOST favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the worst definition as you must meet more requirements than a true own occupation or modified own occupation to receive a benefit payout . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately with a true own occupation or modified own occupation policy or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own . This is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Will I Qualify For Life Insurance ?
The best way to know if you will qualify for life insurance is to visit with an agent who carries lots of choices of policies , and who understands the health and age requirements for each . Guaranteed life insurance is not always available at every age . And sometimes the best price is obtained with no medical underwriting at all . So the only way to know if you qualify , and to get your best price , is to call and discuss your options with someone who has lots of experience finding coverage for people with all types of health .
It depends on many factors as to whether you may qualify for life insurance . The most common things that an underwriter will look at when you apply for life insurance is age , sex , current health , health history , residence , occupation , net worth , income and life style . There are typically 14 rating classes of insurance to determine premium from Best Preferred to Table 10 . If you exceed table 10 , you will probably be declined . There are life insurance carriers that offer low face amounts at guaranteed acceptance . just be sure to fully understand these types of policies , which pay a graduated amount over time . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market and find out health risk before you ever apply for coverage . This can save you from receiving a MIB hit . Medical Information Bureau is checked by all personal insurance companies you apply to and once the mark is registered , it can follow you the rest of your life , so just be careful .
You can always secure guaranteed issue life insurance . You might be able to secure simplified issue , if you have some outstanding medical conditions . But to obtain the best rate possible youll need to go through full underwriting that requires your doctors attending physicians statements , prescriptions medications , motor vehicle report and a declaration of any recreational or vocational hazards . Youll have to undergo a paramed exam with an EKG test , blood and urine analysis . You can also submit an informal application to receive an idea of where you stand and which option you should investigate .
That is a great question ! Almost everyone can qualify for some type of life insurance policy , unless you are a very senior citizen . Most companies will be unwilling to write a policy if you are over the age of 85 , and some as low as 80 . There are a few that will write you above 85 , but they are typically far too expensive to afford , especially if you have health issues . There are companies that will write policies that will give coverage no matter what your health condition is , and your best bet is really to find an experienced agent who will help you find the best policy for you . If you would like to discuss this privately , please feel free to contact me , I 'll happily make time for you . Thank you for asking !
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Non-qualified retirement plans are not sanctioned for the tax deduction like qualified plans are under ERISA . Non-qualified retirement plans generally use annuities and life insurance . Annuities can be used in qualified plans , but life insurance can not . Non-qualified and qualified retirement plans using annuities , for an example , accumulate tax deferred , but the basis of a non-qualified annuity is distributed free of taxation , whereas qualified annuities are fully taxable including basis .
A qualified beneficiary must notify the plan administrator of a qualifying event within 60 days after divorce or legal separation or a child 's ceasing to be covered as a dependent under plan rules . Plan participants and beneficiaries generally must be sent an election notice not later than 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred . The individual then has 60 days to decide whether to elect COBRA continuation coverage . The person has 45 days after electing coverage to pay the initial premium . Qualified beneficiaries must be given an election period during which each qualified beneficiary may choose whether to elect COBRA coverage . Each qualified beneficiary may independently elect COBRA coverage . A covered employee or the covered employee 's spouse may elect COBRA coverage on behalf of all other qualified beneficiaries . A parent or legal guardian may elect on behalf of a minor child . Qualified beneficiaries must be given at least 60 days for the election . This period is measured from the later of the coverage loss date or the date the COBRA election notice is provided by the employer or plan administrator . The election notice must be provided in person or by first class mail within 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred .
Non-Qualified is a term generally used for non ERISA retirement plans or qualified plans . A life insurance company does n't manufacture qualified products . Annuities , like life insurance , start out as non-qualified product lines not under the jurisdiction of ERISA . Non-qualified annuity payouts distribute basis tax free , whereas qualified annuity payouts are all taxable , even basis .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
A Qualified Retirement Plan simply means it is a `` qualified '' account as defined by the Internal Revenue Service . A qualified account simply means there are limitations to the contributions and rules to when you can take the monies out without getting a penalty . A Qualified Retirement Plan can be an IRA , Individual Retirement Account or a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- offered through your employer . A Roth IRA is a Qualified Retirement Plan . There are other qualified plans out there as well however the plans I have mentioned are the most popular . Seek your broker/adviser for more information and to talk about which plan you should focus on or have available to you .
The term `` qualified '' should really be `` tax-qualified '' . A tax-qualified long-term care insurance policy -LRB- TQ -RRB- is one that pays out benefits that are not subject -LRB- in most cases -RRB- to income taxation in the year that they are received by the policy owner . -LRB- See `` NOTE '' , below . -RRB- The benefits paid out froma `` non-qualified '' long-term care policy -LRB- NTQ -RRB- may be subject to income tax in the year that they are received . Policies purchased prior to 1998 should be reviewed by a qualified tax advisor for any questions about taxation of benefits . Legislation in 1996 allowed for federal exemption from benefit payout taxationfor policies purchased after a certain datethat metspecific requirements outlined in that legislation . NOTE : LTC insurance policies that payout their benefit as a cash amount -LRB- indemnity policies -RRB- may exceed the government-allowed limit on how much of that benefit can be considered `` tax-qualified '' . If you have one of those types of policies , consult with the carrier 's policy owner service unit to determine how your benefits might be paid out should you qualify for care . Some carriers will only payout a cash benefit up to the federally-mandated limit to avoid triggering a 1099 being sent to the IRS . But , it 's better to check than be surprised .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
A qualified annuity differs from a non-qualified annuity , which is an annuity funded with after-tax dollars . While distributions -LRB- contributions to a qualified annuity are pre-tax -RRB- from a qualified annuity are taxed as income , distributions from a non-qualified annuity are not subject to income tax in their entirety . Qualified annuities are often set up by employers on behalf of their employees as part of a retirement plan .
In a word , no . The tax law prohibits life insurance being purchased in an IRA . However , you may be able to roll your IRA to a qualified plan tax free . Life insurance can then be purchased through the qualified plan within certain limits . This strategy requires the help of legal and insurance specialists to do properly . And it requires a plan controlled by you through your own business or an employer plan that will accommodate your needs . Please note that while you may be able to then buy life insurance within the qualified plan the purchase of life insurance in the plan will trigger a certain amount of taxable income . This strategy has its proponents and detractors for a variety of reasons . However , if you have poor health and can still qualify for life insurance this could be a great strategy . And it may make sense in other situations . Consult with a qualified life insurance specialist about your options and then employ legal counsel to implement the plan if you choose to proceed .
To determine what retirement plan you should choose , you first need to establish a financial profile that determines your effective tax bracket and includes a risk tolerance assessment . Based on that information , you need to consider whether your retirement plan should be qualified or non-qualified . For example : If you select a qualified plan , does your employer sponsor a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and matching contributions ? If not you may want to look at individual qualified plans like Roth IRA or traditional IRAs . If you dont like some of the restrictions of qualified plans , you may want to investigate cash value life insurance like Participating Whole Life , Current Assumption Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Variable Universal Life . Product suitability needs to match up to the policy owners financial profile and risk tolerance . The policy design is critical to the cash accumulation , using the lowest cost of insurance option that complies with TAMRA .
First consideration is whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified . If your tax bracket is high and/or your employer matches some of your contributions , a qualified plan should be considered . If your tax bracket is low and your employment does n't offer a match then non-qualified plan should be considered . Once you establish whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified , then funding your retirement with the proper product is next . To do this you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review .
Selecting the best retirement plan is determined by your personal financial profile . First consideration is whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified . If your tax bracket is high and/or your employer matches some of your contributions , a qualified plan should be considered . If your tax bracket is low and your employment doesnt offer a match then non-qualified plan should be considered . Once you establish whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified , then funding your retirement with the proper product is next . To do this you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is A Broken Window Covered By Homeowners Insurance ?
Your homeowners insurance would cover a broken window if it was broken due to a covered loss . If the window was broken because you or the kids were playing baseball in the yard and someone knock the ball through the window that more than likely would n't be covered . Please read your policy completely to know what coverage is offered and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Your homeowners insurance would cover a broken window if it was broken due to a covered loss . If the window was broken because you or the kids were playing baseball in the yard and someone knock the ball through the window that more than likely would n't be covered . Please read your policy completely to know what coverage is offered and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
A broken window may be covered by a homeowners insurance policy depending on what broke the window . If an object flew through the window or a vandal broke the window this would be covered minus your deductible . Of course there are other perils that could be covered as well . Just keep in mind your deductible does apply and more often then not if the window is the only damage the window is probably less then your deductible .
A homeowners policy normally covers broken windows . This coverage is removed when a residence is vacant or abandoned . As long as the damage to the windows is one of the perils that the policy covers , a claim would be honored . The claim would be subject to the deductible which may reduce recovery on a broken window quite a bit .
Depends on the reason for the broken window.Typical renters policies will cover vandalism or a rock thrown from your lawnmower . If the broken window is on someone else `` s property then there maybe an issue with coverage . The situation becomes , how expensive is the window compared to your deductible ? The lowest deductibles are usually $ 250 - $ 500 and unless you broke a good size window , it will be cheaper to pay out of pocket .
Homeowners Insurance will cover window replacement for broken windows caused by a covered loss ; depreciation and the policy deductible will be a key factor regarding the payout of the loss ; you must review your policy contract for more specific terms and conditions . To review , policy forms , you may review the following link where the Insurance Services Office Form Homeowners 3 -LRB- HO3 -RRB- is published : WEBSITELINK
The answer depends on what happened to the glass . Was it broken by wind/fire/hail ? If so , it would be covered under a standard HO policy assuming the home was occupied . If it was intentionally broken by the homeowner it would not be covered because insurance policies exclude intentional acts . Keep in mind that you would be subject to your policy deductible . It may not make sense to put a claim in for something small like a broken window or screen door because you could experience increased insurance costs for making a claim . I would speak with your independent insurance agent and discuss the best way to proceed given your situation . Typically , I like to reserve using your home insurance for a catastrophic event like a hurricane , major fire or damaging storm . Hope this answer helps .
That is a great question ! Your homeowners policy will cover all kinds of things , like fire , someone getting hurt on your property , or a broken window . The coverage is broken down to two types : property , and liability . The property coverage protects against those actual physical damages that may occur . The liability side protects against damages that may be brought against you for things that happen upon your property . I hope that helps ! Thanks for asking !
It may , depending on the circumstances behind the broken window your renters insurance may pay for the broken window less your policy deductilble . Many policies include some coverage for broken windows . Please remember every policy is different . read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be .
Homeowners Insurance does cover your homes windows if they are broken due to vandalism , wind , hail or another peril that is covered on your policy . It is important to remember that the claim will most likely be subject to a deductible so when trying to decide whether or not to file a claim make sure to take your deductible into account .
That is a great question ! One of the best things about life insurance is that once the policy has been approved and issued , the only way that the contract can be broken is if you had misrepresented the facts about your health , decide to stop paying , or to cancel it . If there is reason for the insurer to believe that you had prior knowledge of your cancer when you applied for it , and said nothing about it , they can drop you . There is a two year window at the beginning of the policy that allows them that right . After that two year window , you are covered regardless of what turns your health may take . I pray that your cancer is easily beaten , and that you live a long and rewarding life . Thank you for asking !
Talk to your Insurance Professional about the particular terms and conditions of your policy . If you have suffered such a loss , I am very sorry that you have to go through this . Try to complete an inventory of the items that have been stolen and be sure to also try to photograph any damage that may have resulted from the break in - broken windows , forced windows or doors or the like . CALL THE POLICE and report the incident . I am assuming that you came in after the fact , but if you ever find yourself in a situation where it looks as if the burglary might still be happening , DO NOT go in . Report your loss to your Insurance Professional and they will open your loss report with your company . A claim representative will contact you and ask for your inventory and police report . Theft is normally a covered peril in a renters policy so the claim once investigated would be settled based upon the items lost and or damaged and the amount of your policy deductible .
If your window is damaged or broken and it is caused by a covered peril in your policy , then yes , you will have coverage , of course subject to your deductible . Keep in mind that you need to be residing in your home at the time that the damage occurred . If your home is vacant , there would be no such coverage .
That can really vary depending on the severity and type of loss . If for example , a rock or a baseball has broken a window , that can be handled pretty quickly . If on the other hand the house has suffered severe damage as a result of a storm or a fire for example , that could take a bit longer .
A broken TV Screen would be covered by home owner insurance only in the event of a covered loss such as burglary , fire , hail , or wind . Otherwise , the broken tv screen is not a covered repair to be filed on a homeowner 's policy . Most home owner policies have at least a $ 500 deductible . therefore , in the event it is covered , you may want to find out the cost of the repair before making a claim on your insurance .
As always , it is best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . If you are asking if a homeowners policy would pay to replace your older windows with replacement windows , unless the older windows had been severely damaged or destroyed by a covered peril , the odds are that your policy would not pay for the replacements . A Homeowners Insurance policy provides coverage to return your property to proper condition in the event that it has been damaged or lost due to some covered peril . Fire , severe wind , hurricane , lightening etc are some examples of these . Wear and tear is not .
Home insurance does not cover a broken TV , a broken radio or any broken appliance . Wear and tear and product defect are simply not perils that insurers pay for for home policies . Fire , theft , vandalism and many other items would be covered . An experienced broker can review the best prices in your area so you pay less and cover more .
It may . Whether or not the broken sewer pipes are covered by your homeowners isnurance policy is going to depend on if the damage was caused by a covered loss . If the broken sewer pipes claim was covered you would also be susecptable to your policy 's deductible . Please read your policy completely to find out about the coverage offered and any exclusions that may be contained within or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy wilth you .
You are going to have to determine what caused the damages and submit a claim appropriately . For example there may be water damage of a broken pipe or water damage form a flood . both are water damage but both are not typically covered under the homeowners policy . A broken pipe from say a freeze loss would be typically covered . A flood from a nearby stream would not be covered . In property insurance you may have contents to list and produce a notice of loss . Such an inventory is hard to do after the damage occurs . for that reason we recommend keeping an inventory of your important household goods away form your premises in a safe place .
Homeowners Insurance usually covers water damage except as excluded on a policy ! Water Damage due to Flood Waters from outside are not covered and also the Backup of Sewers/Drains may be limited or excluded on a home insurance policy unless endorsed otherwise . If water damage is caused as a result of a leaking roof or broken interior plumbing , the damage would usually be covered . Please note : plumbing is not covered by the home insurance policy since plumbing is expected to be maintained in good condition at all times by the homeowner . A home warranty policy may be separately purchased by the homeowner for maintenance repairs including plumbing . For further details on coverage , please consult your policy booklet and/or contact a licensed representative to assist reading the policy to answer your question in detail .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Who Is The Cheapest Home Insurance ?
The cheapest homeowners policy is the one that pays all of the damages that you sustain -LRB- minus the deductible -RRB- when you have a claim . Anything less than that is expensive . It isnt the premium that matters ; it is the limits of coverage . A good agent will make sure that the limits match your needs so that when a claim happens there is adequate coverage .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
Regardless of whether or not a life insurance agency advertises cheap life insurance , the reality is that all life insurance companies must charge you the same price , no matter where you purchased the policy from . However , there are some factors that enter into whether you will find a cheaper policy at one agency over another . Some of these agencies ' methods are positive , and some are negative . Here are some examples of both . Positive 1 -RRB- The insurance agency takes all your health details and shops among multiple carriers to find the one that will issue your policy at the cheapest price . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency will sell you a policy that suits your need , not pressuring you to buy a more expensive policy just because it makes them more money . 3 -RRB- The insurance agent will go to bat for you if you are rated unfairly , and strive to help you resolve that , or find you another policy , if possible . Negative 1 -RRB- The insurance agency offers you a short term policy , or accidental death policy , just to make the sale . They do this whether or not that type of policy best suits your need . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency neglects to ask pertinent health details and then offers you a cheap policy . Or else they ask health details but still claim to be able to get you impossibly low rates , often out of ignorance . Ironically , to get the cheapest life insurance , you need a life insurance agent who is `` valuable '' . Go to someone you trust to listen to you , who will shop your case among multiple carriers to find your best price , and who will not sell you something worthless just to save off a few dollars and make the sale . That way you will have a policy of value at the most affordable price .
As with most everything in life , the best and the cheapest are rarely the same thing and you do tend to get what you pay for . The cheapest health insurance that meets the requirements under ObamaCare will have a very high deductible and have you paying for all health care services -LRB- except preventive care -RRB- out of your pocket until you have met that deductible that may be $ 6000 or more . If you never use any health care during the year then this would meet your criteria for being the cheapest and perhaps the best . The best heath insurance plans that meet the requirements under ObamaCare will provide you with reasonable copayments , a low deductible and relatively low out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure -LRB- maybe as low as several hundred or a thousand dollars -RRB- . However , these plans will have a significantly higher monthly premium . The true answer to your question is unique to each individual . You would be well served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you define your needs and budget and then find the best health insurance plan -LRB- either in the government marketplaces or outside them -RRB- that fits your needs .
The cost of Critical Care Insurance varies according to the age of the applicant , whether or not they use tobacco , their BMI , if they have a family history of certain illnesses , and whether they themselves have any health conditions . Therefore , what is the cheapest Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan for one person , may not be the cheapest for another . To find the cheapest quote for you , go to a website that offers Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan and call or visit them .
You can find the cheapest auto insurance at your agents office . The cheapest auto insurance is the policy with adequate limits that pays damages that result from an accident . Since this can involve personal injury and property damage , the amount can increase rapidly . Your agent will listen to you , offer sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . When you have a claim , you will be happy that you have the cheapest insurancethe one that pays !
The cheapest life insurance policy is the one that you already own . The cheapest life insurance policy you can buy is one that is scheduled to expire the day after you die . The fact is that the cheapest life insurance policy is always the one that is in force on the day that you die . If that is your concern work with a good life insurance agent . The agent can match your needs with a policy that will fit into your budget . Remember that when you save money on the premium and the policy expires before you die ; it is your loved ones that pay the price .
The cheapest renters policy is not the one with the lowest premium . The cheapest renters policy is the one that pays the most when you have a claim . The place to purchase the cheapest renters policy is from a trusted insurance agent . The agents advice and help in setting appropriate limits could save you thousands of dollars .
The cheapest renter 's policy is the one that pays the full amount of a claim and leaves you paying nothing more than the deductible . Everything else costs too much ! You probably wanted to know what company or type of company is cheapest but that is not really a bargain . Having enough coverage with a company that will pay the claim is the cheapest way you can go .
I 'll share a common answer to a common question . It depends . Which company offers the cheapest auto insurance in Washington depends primarily on the insuredthe client . With all the variables companies use to get the final price , there is no way to tell what companies offers the cheapest rates for all clients all the time . In fact , most insurance companies do n't want to be the cheapest for every client . Most companies want to `` win '' accounts based on price 30-40 % of the time . With that information , it 's important to allow a trusted , licensed agent to shop multiple companies for you .
`` Cheaper '' in premium or `` cheaper '' in service provided and claims paid ? No one insurance company will always be the `` cheapest '' in premium . If you are looking for the cheapest premium , you best plan on shopping and switching monthly because competitive pricing/positioning is ALWAYS changing . However if you value appropriate coverage for your station in life , do your research on reputable companies , find an insurance professional you trust and stick with him or her . It will average out in the long term . You potentially do yourself a financial disservice at claim time if you elect to go with the cheapest .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
The cheapest auto insurance is the policy that pays the maximum amount when you have a claim . This policy may not have the lowest premium but it protects you . At that moment there will not be any other criteria to judge whether the policy was cheapest or not . You get this kind of insurance from an insurance agent who will listen to you , provide sound financial advice , and communicate clearly with both you and the insurance company .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Do Life Insurance Agents Make In Vermont ?
Life insurance agents in Vermont make a wide range of salaries . As with any other business that pays commission -LRB- and usually , commission only -RRB- , the amount of work put into the career makes a big difference . But it also depends on the economy , how many people you know , whether you have the money to stick with it for a while , etc. . If there is an average , most agents in Vermont probably do not make it , but earn far less or far more than that .
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics , the national average annual income of an insurance agent is around $ 44,500 . There is no specific information for Vermont life insurance agents . There is a lot of variance in income earnings since the jobs is generally 100 % commission . Some agents will earn less than $ 20,000 per year and other will earn over $ 100,000 per year .
Life insurance agents in Vermont make a wide range of salaries . As with any other business that pays commission -LRB- and usually , commission only -RRB- , the amount of work put into the career makes a big difference . But it also depends on the economy , how many people you know , whether you have the money to stick with it for a while , etc. . If there is an average , most agents in Vermont probably do not make it , but earn far less or far more than that .
Such an excellent question ! Yes , but do it in a very new and special way . There is now a Life Insurance you can buy which comes with living benefits , but not just the ability to get some money from it , but true living benefits to cover your needs in life . The benefits include chronic care , chronic illness , terminal illness , retirement , and other major needs . This type of policy is only available through a limited agent pool , those working with Premier Financial Alliance . They provide a product through National Life Group , 167 years in Vermont . The company limits its sales of this full product exclusively through Premier Financial . I urge you to call your PFA agent for find out the details . You can save a great deal of money by combining your policies and coverage , while get the coverage you really need . Thank you . GARY LANE . PFA agent , 714 422 9616 .
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics , the national average annual income of an insurance agent is around $ 44,500 . There is no specific information for Vermont life insurance agents . There is a lot of variance in income earnings since the jobs is generally 100 % commission . Some agents will earn less than $ 20,000 per year and other will earn over $ 100,000 per year .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , there are many great companies , but the choice should be made with some key factors in mind . My personal favorite has been around for 167 years , based in Vermont . It is a mutual company , meaning all profits are returned to the policy holders , lowering the rates . It is National Life Group . Why do I prefer it ? Because they offer , at absolutely no extra charge , and have been doing so for many years , LIVING BENEFITS . Their policies will cover you while your are living , not just when you die . They cover such things as chronic care , catastrophic care , terminal care . You can even go overseas to get experimental treatments to save your life . If you can not work , due to disability , they will also help . You save money by having only one policy and you are reliable coverage from a great company , at a low price . Its best policies are available through their largest brokers , Premier Financial Alliance , PFA . Talk with your local PFA agent . Thank you . GARY LANE .
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Vermont BlueCross BlueShield has a health insurance product call Medigap Blue . It provides Medicare Supplement coverage to Original Medicare Part A and Part B . They offer Medigap Plans A , C , D , F and N with all the standardized benefits as with other insurance companies . Their premium rates are grouped into under 65 disabled and over 65 . Please let me know if I can offer further assistance .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To my knowledge , no other company has purchased National Life Insurance Company . National Life was established in Vermont in 1848 . Life of the Southwest was purchased by National Life in , and they also own Equity and Sentinel . However , National Life is the flagship enterprise of all those companies , and is not owned by another company .
Yes , most disability insurance policies pay claims for mental disorders . However , often times the benefit period for mental disorders is capped at 24 months except in the state of Vermont where limitations are not allowed . If the benefit is capped , then the benefits will cease once the insured has been paid benefits for the specified period of time -LRB- again usually 24 months -RRB- . There are some carriers that do not cap -LRB- restrict -RRB- this benefit .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There are a few agents making 7 figures . Many more struggling below $ 50,000 . How much you can make will of course vary by factors like your drive , market focus and skill . Less now than in the past but where you live and work could have a big impact on how much you make . The internet has changed that some . Your gross income is also going to be different than your net income depending on your business model . Some agents rely on purchased leads some rely on a heavy internet presents . Both methods have high cost . Others may call or door knock a list which is going to have minimal cost . Many established agents have a large client base that they service and get referrals from . So while an agent may have a large gross income , depending on business cost , that agent could very easily net much less than the guy with a much smaller gross .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Pay Auto Insurance With A Credit Card ?
That is going to depend on your carrier . To the best of my knowledge there are a few carriers out there that will accept payment through a credit card . Many carriers still prefer payment to be in the form of a check or by debit card . Contact a local agent to discuss the payment options that they have available with the carriers that they work with .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
Some insurance companies will not accept credit cards for payment of premiums . Some will . Typically if you pay your premiums annually , semi-annually or quarterly many providers will accept credit card payment . It seems the biggest issue with credit cards is that people tend to forget about updating their information as needed with the companies they pay by credit card . When a card expires and is replaced with a new expiration date , the previous card is no longer useable . Sometimes people will delete a credit card account that was being used for automatic payments and not inform their creditor of a replacement card . It creates a lot of accounting headaches . So insurance companies prefer to debit from checking or savings accounts .
The answer here is typically yes . Over the past decade or so carriers have built sufficient billing capabilities to handle debit or credit card payments . Note to yourself that credit and debit cards can be used or limited in an important way . Some carriers will allow the down payment on new polices to made on a credit or debit but not subsequent billings . Other companies will allow and are set up to make recurring credit or debit transactions . There is an ease of doing the recurring credit card transactions , however try to remember to advise every such authorized party in the event that your credit card account or number changes . While we discuss this let me point one simple thing you can do to stay on top of credit cards , Put them on a scannable device and make your self a copy of both front and back . This can assist you if your wallet is lost or stolen .
If you are asking whether the credit card company can garnish life insurance proceeds to pay off credit card debt left by the deceased , the answer is no , as long as the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is a living person . Creditors can go after the estate of the deceased for payment , so if the the beneficiary of the policy is the insured person 's `` estate '' , then the credit card company could have a shot at collecting from the life insurance benefit . If you are asking whether the cost of life insurance is counted as credit card debt , the answer is again no , not unless premiums are charged to a credit card .
This depends upon where you are coming from . If you currently live in the U.S. you will have a couple of options . There are endorsements available through your current Home and Auto policies for rented/non-owned cars . If you have a credit card , then the credit card might offer car rental insurance if it is used to purchase the rental . If you do n't have Home/Auto insurance in the U.S. or a credit card then you can always purchase rental insurance through the rental agency . I hope these options help .
If you have a personal auto coverage and you rent a car your existing auto policy will cover you in the rental car , but if you have an accident you will have to pay your normal deductible . The rental car companies make a LOT of money from selling really overpriced insurance and in general it 's a good idea to just say no as long as you do have a personal auto policy . If you do n't have a personal auto policy then you do need to get the rental insurance to at least have the legally required liability coverage . Many credit cards also provide you some rental car insurance for free , so check with your credit card company too .
Every insurance company is different , but generally speaking , most companies will accept credit cards . However , the ones that do accept credit card payments may or may not accept the card the your are trying to use . So in short , you can usually use a credit card to pay for for insurance , but just contact your local insurance professional or carrier to make sure . Thanks for asking !
Life insurance is not reported on credit reports , but if you pay your monthly life insurance premium with a credit card , it will show up on credit reports . As with other bills that are paid on time by credit card , paying your life insurance premium consistently and on time can improve your credit score .
You can pay for health insurance with a credit card ... sometimes . I 'll clarify . Typically , when you apply for a new policy , there may be a billing option that allows you to make the first payment with a credit card . However , usually , with ongoing and future billing , payment by check or via mail is the preferred method . However , late payments can often be paid by credit card . Each carrier has its own rules .
I have never heard of any carrier refusing to not take a credit card for the down payment but not every carrier will use the card for automatic payment . However I do have insured that have those pre paid credit cards and if you contact the financial institution they do have routing numbers and account number that they can give you to set up automatic payment off that card as though it was a checking account number Many agents will not take the time and help you find our this information but it sure can make your monthly billing less setting it up on automatic payment
Generally you can pay for car insurance using a credit card . Some carriers require that you be on EFT if you want automatic payments taken out monthly , but you do n't have to be on automatic payments . You can just call in a credit card to pay the bill . Most carriers will accept credit cards for the down payment , as well . There are a few exceptions , such as Texas Fair Plan , who only take checks and money orders , but those are few and far between .
No . Getting auto insurance quotes will not affect your credit score . This is a myth that just will not go away ! If you were to apply for multiple credit cards or multiple loans , that would negatively affect your credit score . and because of that , many people make the false assumption that getting quotes with multiple auto insurance companies would also hurt your credit score . But that is simply not true .
Some life insurance companies allow you to pay regular premiums automatically , by credit card . MSN Money states that setting up automatic payments on a credit card is one way to raise your credit score . So in that respect , and that respect only , purchasing life insurance could improve your credit score . Read here for more info : WEBSITELINK
That is an excellent question ! The getting of quotes has no effect upon your credit score at all . In the process of getting a quote , there is nooffer of credit like there is in applying for a loan or credit card . All you are asking for is an estimate of the cost , just like you would at a mechanic before you would have work done . -LRB- When you apply for a credit card , you are asking them to give you access to money that you do n't have , so that offer or attempt will show up on your credit report . -RRB- It is in your best interest to get a few quotes , so ask away . Thanks for asking !
This is up to your insurance carrier . Many insurance carriers allow you to pay for your auto insurance coverage weekly , monthly , quarterly , semi-annually , or annually . Your auto insurance policy will typically be established for a six month or twelve month period of time . There are a few carriers that have shorter periods of time available but are typically more costly . To pay for your coverage many carriers accept cash , check , money order , eft , debit card , or credit card .
While it may be true your own liability , comprehensive and collision coverage may extend to cover you when renting a car , most of the rental agreements I have read make the renter responsible for expenses not covered by most auto insurance policies . In addition to the responsibility for the deductible , most rental companies make you reimburse them for the loss of value to their damaged car , the revenue they lose while the car is out of service and even the administrative costs they incur having the car repaired . These costs are not covered by most auto insurance policies . Remember you gave them your credit card and permission to put those charges right on your card . That might make your trip one you will remember ! And the damage to the rental car might not even be your fault ! Unless you have a good personal umbrella policy without a following form auto limitation and/or personal property care custody or control exclusion , I suggest you consider buying the damage waiver rental companies offer . The price is ridiculously high but it avoids an argument with a big company who would have your money and doesnt like to give it back . If more people would read the rental agreement and object to accepting responsibility for these costs , maybe the rental companies would remove these indemnity clauses for many of their good repeat rental customers . Until then it may be a matter of Pay me now or Pay me later .
Here is a life hack : 1 . Check with your credit card provider . Many of them offer liability coverage automatically included as long as you pay for the rental with this card . 2 . If you have business insurance , but no business auto , add Hired/Non-Owned coverage . For pennies a day -LRB- $ 100 - $ 200 a year -RRB- it will provide you with auto liability insurance for cars you rent or borrow for your business needs . It also covers your employees ' and your personal auto that was used in a course of business . For example , you are asking your employee to drop off office keys . The employee gets into the accident . You have liability coverage provided . 3 . Some insurance carrier also offer hired car property damage . This is the coverage for the car you rented/hired/borrowed .
Great question ! I 'd ask you - why would you want to ? Unless you are paying off your credit card balances promptly every month -LRB- not many people do , unfortunately -RRB- all you are doing is increasing the cost of your payment . If your payment is $ 100 , and the interest on your card is 18 % , you effectively just paid $ 118 for the payment . Add to that the extra $ 18 next month , and so on until your balance is paid ... Please think twice about using your credit for small things . More often than not credit harms more than it helps . If you need help , please contact me . I 'm happy to help.Thanks for asking !
No ... or at least it should n't . If you were to pull your credit report after shopping for auto insurance , you would see a handful of `` Credit Inquries '' . Carriers and quoting agents to not actually pull a credit report on those seking a quote , merely make an inquiry -LRB- at least that iswhat the carriers to us agents -RRB- . From what we are told , these types of inquries should not effect your credit score like the reports pulled when applying for a loan or credit card .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Ever Deductible ?
Yes , in addition , certain charitable giving situations allow for a tax deduction of the premium paid on the policy as a charitable deduction . For example , you may wish to endow your church for $ 50,000 upon your death . You would make the Church 's 501 -LRB- c -RRB- 3 Charity , the Irrevocable Beneficiary and Owner of your policy and you would be the insured and Payor of the plan . Since you have no interest in the cash value or benefit your premium payments would be considered deductible under the Charitable Giving Deduction on your returns . As always , Insurance agents do not give tax or legal advice , always verify suggestions or comments with your Tax Adviser , CPA or Attorney .
No , a personal income tax deduction is not allowed where the taxpayer is the policy owner or beneficiary . A business can not do so either where the business is owner and beneficiary . Business owners who wish to obtain a deduction for their business while obtaining life insurance often do so indirectly through other arrangements that use life insurance such as bonus plans , pension plans or group term life plans . In limited circumstances , one may be able to take a charitable deduction for premium paid on a life policy where the charity is the owner and beneficiary . This is for general planning information only - consult with a tax adviser for tax advice for your situation .
Yes . Certain qualified plans , with their inherentdeductability can use whole life insurance and universal life insurance . Doing so will subject the participant to the economic benefit tax , but it may be financially viable . There are specific plans such as 412i and 419af6 death benefit only plans that have taxdeductabilityand can include life insurance .
All insurance auto policies are the same they all have liability which is damage to other . Then you have optional coverage of un insured and under insured and medical pay then of course the option of `` Full '' coverage which really is not the best choice of words for coverage but that is coverage that repairs your auto in the even of a loss minus the deductible . The best coverage would be to have higher limits and full coverage . How ever you budget needs to thought about also . If you are purchasing all the coverage and ca n't afford the higher deductible then full coverage may not be the best option for you . Before you ever purchase a car or insurance shop around call a local agent and discuss what options you have . Many agencies demand that you have certain limits which is recommended to have the higher limits but it is pointless if you ca n't afford the higher limits because if it means eating or insurance well you going to choose food . Talk to an agent who will listen to your concerns and find you the most affordable rate and coverage that your desire . Online quotes can sometime be lower but the service sometimes is not as well as an agent example at our agency you can reach us 24/7 we never want you to ever have to call a 800 number and talk to a stranger .
I never call Whole Life an Investment , because it has an entirely different purpose , but it is a TOOL ! A financial tool that pays off in many ways . For a kid , it is probably the very best financial tool you can ever have . It guarantees that for the life of that child , they will always have life insurance , so long as premiums are paid . They do not have to worry about ever becoming uninsurable , such as with diabetes or obesity , or heart ailment , cancer , or any other reason on earth . They are insured ! Their premiums will NEVER ever go up . They are locked in for the entire life , no matter what happens . As a kid , their rates are extremely low , so low they can be incredible . Every parent or grandparent should get life insurance on their children or grand kids . Love to help . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Another part to this answer is that not all life insurance policies ever pay a death claim . Most life insurance is not designed to be in force when you die unless you die younger than average . Term Life Insurance only pays a death claim if you die while it is in force . That 's usually 20-years when you are in your 30 's and 40 's and often up into your low 60 's . But most people do n't die that young . Other insurance is tied to your employer and only covers you during your working years . Most people do n't die during your working years . So the insurance company gets to keep all those premiums . Whole-life insurance is priced much higher than the others because it will pay a death claim 100 % of the time unless you cancel the policy . All insurance is priced based on the likelyhood of it ever paying a death claim . That 's why a healthy 35 year old man can buy a million-dollar 20-year term policy cheaper than a 70-year old would pay for a $ 10,000 whole-life policy . One is very unlikely to ever cost the insurance company anything . The other will certainly be paying a death claim within the next couple decades if not sooner .
Life insurance does not have a deductible , how ever you should look at your deductibles to see where you can save money to increase you savings . If you have home owners insurance Look at the difference of having a low deductible and a high deductible . You will be shocked at how much money you can save . Now this works with someone who has n't used their deductible in years . The question I have for you , Is that money better off in my pocket or the insurance company ?
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
Everything mentioned above is correct . You need to also consider when selecting Life Insurance for somebody that 's older the underwriting process you 'll have to go through . Depending on the benefit amount , some companies have a nonmedical underwriting process . That means mom and dad do n't have to give a blood or urine sample . You 'll see these type of plans on TV . Yet be aware of what you 're buying . Most of the TV Brands do not have guaranteed level premiums for life , or the death benefit is n't paid in full for the first two years . Allow me to explain in more detail . These plans are often called final expense Life Insurance . Generally speaking there or two ways the benefits are paid out . If your parents or in overall good health , without a major event like a heart attack or cancer in the last two years , they should be eligible for what 's called an immediate benefit . Once the policies approved the death benefit is available the next day . The other type is called a graded benefit -LRB- or call date modified benefit in some cases -RRB- . Again , generally speaking , most of these plans have a limited payout the first two years of policy is in force . Some pay a percentage of the death benefit while others refund all your premiums plus an interest rate . These plans are great if mom and dad are in poor health . Some applications have zero medical questions . I often see where someone is sold a graded benefit when they could have received a level benefit with a different carrier . Underwriting is the key factor ! If your parents are in good health they may want to consider a fully underwritten policy . That typically includes a small medical exam . Think of it this way , the deeper the carrier looks into somebody 's health , the better their rate for the same benefit will be . Then there 's the whole question of what type of insurance to get . Whole Life -LRB- which is what the Final expense plans are -RRB- , Term , or Universal Life . The Orman 's and Ramsey 's of the world will tell you to buy nothing else than term . . ever , ever , ever ... . I 'm not going to debate that now . Just going to say they are hurting a lot of people with such narrow , cookie cutter advice . ALL life insurance types have a time & place . If you have further questions ... Reach out . Honored to help ... - gravy .
One type of life insurance -LRB- variable life insurance -RRB- has an investment component but no life insurance itself is NEVER an investment . Life insurance is guaranteed protection . An investment is risk . Without risk the product can NOT be considered an investment . This is not a bad thing . It 's a good thing . Life insurance does what it was designed to do better than any investment ever could . You will find a few agents that will call life insurance an investment to make a sale . Those who get caught at it are subject to huge fines and can lose their license to sell insurance . It is considered very misleading and the Department of Insurance of your state should be contacted if you ever have an agent telling you such a thing .
This can be covered if you have comprehensive coverage . You will have a deductible . Many think that the higher deductible is the better option how ever . This may not be the case . Comprehensive coverage is for deer tree vandals glass and ect basically anything other then a crash that you caused . Having a Higher deductible of $ 1000 may lower your monthly payments by as much as 10.00 a month but then you have to pay for the 1st 1000 worth of damage and not many have that much laying around to be able to pay but if you had a 100 deductible and paid a little more each month then you would only be paying 100 out of pocket before your insurance company paid anything . There also is one carrier that is out there in Montana that you can have what is called deer coverage . it cost 2.50 a month and they pay up to 1000 worth of deer damage with no deductible . . I am not sure if this is offered in any other state but can be well worth the 2.50 a month
Annual renewable term life insurance is renewable at an ever increasing annual premium . Some guaranteed level term life insurance can renew after the guaranteed period is over at an ever increasing annual premium . Many planners recommend purchasing term life insurance with a conversion clause to extend permanent coverage as another alternative to renewable premiums .
Having life insurance on the job is better than having nothing , you should have a personal policy as well ; why ? Your job , if you ever left , fired , laid off , quit , retire , no more group life insurance . I say always elect to join a group work policy because it 's so cheap . I tell all my clients this . -LRB- At work your job owns your policy -RRB- Again ; therefore you should have your own policy as well . Young and healthy is the best time to get life insurance you are rated based on your health and age and some other factors . Life insurance is not something you can get when ever you feel like it , it 's like applying for a credit card either your approved as applied for , approved at a higher rate or your insurance is decline . If your health is not so great then a group policy of course would be great for you .
A mortgage is generally the largest debt you 'll ever have on the one of the largest real estate asset you 'll ever own . Most banking institutions require life insurance for those depositing a small down payment . The rule of thumb on down payments that requires life insurance is under 20 % of the value of the home .
Is whole life ever a good idea ? Absolutely , for those who understand it 's application and use , it makes great sense . For those who always want to compare it to a stock mutual fund that never ever does anything but go up , well , it shows that they really do n't have a good understanding of how RISK applies to financial choices . I own whole life for many years now . It has served me well , done what I have expected it to do and even better it has never gone backwards like my qualified plan investments have or my real estate investments have . Whole life insurance is a solidly boring financial product that serves a good purpose in a portfolio . It is part of a portfolio , a boring part , but if you 've been around long enough and put money in different places , you 'll understand the need to have something like whole life . Some choices should n't keep you up at night .
That is a good question ! Typically college students are under age 30 and therefore are in the best class as far as insurance premiums go . When a person is young and healthy is the very best time to implement a Whole Life , Cash Value insurance policy . So really the first thing a college student needs to know about life insurance is that while Term insurance is really cheap , it has no cash value to the policy holder ever , unless it has a accelerated benefit rider . In that case it will pay a percentage of the death benefit to the policy holder in the case of critical or chronic illness where the client can not perform at least 2 of the essential daily living tasks . Otherwise the only benefit to anyone other than the insurance provider is in the case where the death benefit is paid to the beneficiary . Also regarding Term insurance , as the name implies , it will end at the completion of the term , ie : 10 years ; 20 years ; 30 years . And then it will be much more expensive to buy another term . Whole Life is more costly in premium than Term , but still much less when you are young and healthy . There are a variety of kinds of Whole Life policies , but with `` Straight Whole Life '' premiums are guaranteed not to increase over the life of the policy , so in actuality it is more affordable than Term over the long haul . And the premiums you pay into Whole Life build cash value that you can use without ever paying taxes on ! Contact me for more information .
People are surviving more critical illnesses than ever before due to advancements in medical treatment of cancer , heart disease , organ damage , and a multitude of life threatening diseases . However , these treatments can be very time consuming and costly . Thus , there is a greater need than ever for Critical Illness Insurance .
Whether anyone actually needs Critical Illness Insurance is hard to say . Like all insurance , it is a protection against a known risk , but it is unknown whether that risk will ever happen to you . That being said , the types of critical illnesses that used to kill people in the past , are now routinely being survived due to medical advancements . However , these medical treatments are not cheap , and a person can be treated for many years for the same ailment . So there is a higher chance than ever that critical illness insurance could be needed in your lifetime .
Here is a question on one of my carriers life insurance applications : `` Have you ever participated in , or within the next two years do you intend to participate in , hang-gliding , sky diving , parachuting , ultralight flying , vehicle racing , scuba diving , mountain or rock climbing , rodeos , competitive skiing or snowboarding , extreme sports or other hazardous activities ? '' So I would ask if at the time you purchased the policy had you ever hunted ? If the answer is `` no '' then I would say you should be fine . People can only answer these questions honestly at the present time . It 's always best to check with the carrier though if you have any concerns . Be safe !
That is a great question ! I think that it is a shame that we even have to ask anymore if companies are honest ... In all the policies I 've ever written , only one did not pay out the whole amount , and that was because they thought there was some false answers on the application . They still paid back everything that had ever been paid in , plus some interest . There are a great many companies that are honest , and do the right thing . If you want to see how honest yours is , go to your State 's Department of Insurance site , and look at the complaints filed . If you are in the process of deciding whether life insurance is right for you , please contact me , and we 'll discuss your concerns privately . Thank you for asking !
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is Lender Placed Homeowners Insurance ?
Under the terms of your mortgage your lender can buy a homeowners policy to protect his interest . He will do this if you do not provide one . That cost of that policy is then included in your mortgage payments . The policy may not protect your interests but it will protect the lenders . The policy may be more expensive . Normally the lender will discontinue the policy when you buy one yourself , naming him as mortgagee .
In New York the named insured for a homeowners policy must occupy the premises . The mortgagee or lender does not qualify for a homeowners policyasit does not occupy the premises as a residence . When the borrower 's ` hazard insurance ' is terminated , the lender secures property coverage to protect their insurable interest only . Typically , the borrower is not a named insured on these ` forced placed ' policies purchased by the lender . In this situation the borrower now has no insurance on the dwelling , their personal property , nor do they have any personal liability insurance . In some states a lender may be able to purchase a homeowners policy and may be able to include the borrower as a named insured . I have never seen this in New York . If you are the borrower and your lender has purchased the ` forced placed ' coverage , ask for a copy of the policy to make sure you are afforded coverage under the policy . The premium for this ` forced placed ' policy will be added to your mortgage payments .
In New York the named insured for a homeowners policy must occupy the premises . The mortgagee or lender does not qualify for a homeowners policyasit does not occupy the premises as a residence . When the borrower 's ` hazard insurance ' is terminated , the lender secures property coverage to protect their insurable interest only . Typically , the borrower is not a named insured on these ` forced placed ' policies purchased by the lender . In this situation the borrower now has no insurance on the dwelling , their personal property , nor do they have any personal liability insurance . In some states a lender may be able to purchase a homeowners policy and may be able to include the borrower as a named insured . I have never seen this in New York . If you are the borrower and your lender has purchased the ` forced placed ' coverage , ask for a copy of the policy to make sure you are afforded coverage under the policy . The premium for this ` forced placed ' policy will be added to your mortgage payments .
Most often the lender requires ` hazard insurance ' premiums be included in the escrow account . The borrower may request the insurance be added to an existing escrow account or one set up for the insurance premium but the untimate decision is up to the lender . Normally when establing escrow , the borrower pays the first year premium at closing and the escrow provider includes an additional monthly amount in the mortgage payments for the next 11 or 12 months so there is enough in the escrow account available to pay the renewal premium . What is critical here is for the borrower to keep their insurance carrier informed of any change in the lender 's or escrow servicing entity 's name , address , or account reference number . The borrower should also let the lender know of any changes to the insurance contract which raise or lower the premium . This would include an upcoming renewal premium that may be significantly higher -LRB- for various reasons -RRB- than the expiring premium . Many lenders want policies and documents to go to one address and bills to another -LRB- possibly the escrow servicing entity . -RRB- All borrowers must be cognizant of these items and proactive in notifying all interested parties . The last thing a borrower want is for their ` homeowners policy ' to be cancelled for non-payment because the escrow entity did n't receive the renewal bill so they could pay the renewal premium . Whenever you receive anything from an insurance company you have a policy with , make sure you understand what it is and take action immediately . In the event the policy is cancelled -LRB- for any reason or event -RRB- the lender will no doubt secure ` force placed ' hazard insurance to protect their interest -LRB- and not that of the borrower . -RRB- A forced placed policy will definitely be a lot more expensive premium-wise and a lot more restrictive coverage-wise . Not a good situation to be in and usually totally avoidable . So if a borrower enters this type of situation , they had better ` stay on top of it ' or suffer the consequences .
When homeowners insurance lapses , your coverage immediately stops . If you have a mortgage on your home your lender will automatically place insurance effective the first date of lapse . In this situation you want to get coverage back in place as soon as possible because lender placed temporary insurance can be up to 400 % more expensive than your prior company .
This question addresses the issue of policy names . A home policy could mean a homeowners insurance policy . A mortgage policy could be talking about the policy that protects a lender from default on a loan . The mortgage policy could also be talking about a term insurance policy that provides enough money to pay off the mortgage in the event of death during the term of the policy -LRB- and hopefully the mortgage . -RRB- Another problem is that there is a variety of property insurance policies , any one of which might satisfy a lender . Knowing the list of covered perils is critical and understanding the value added in a homeowners form is essential . The bottom line is that the home policy is probably designed to satisfy a lender and restore a damaged home for the benefit of the homeowner . The mortgage policy is generally designed to either insure enough money to pay off the mortgage or protect the lender against default by the borrower .
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
If you are a homeowner you need homeowners insurance . If you are a first time buyer then escrow and the lender will make sure you have homeowners insurance in place at the close of the home sale . If you are already a homeowner then I recommend you maintain a homeowners policy . If your home is paid in full you do have the option of letting the policy go but I would advise against this unless you believe you can afford the replace your home in the event of a total loss .
No one in California is required to purchase homeowners insurance . A homeowners has the option of self insuring . However a lender will require a homeowner to carry homeowners insurance as a condition of your loan . This is to guarantee the lenders investment is not lost if there is a loss on the property . Once your home is paid off you may do as you wish . However in either case I strongly suggest you protect what most likely is your biggest investment is insurance .
Life insurance is required as collateral at the lenders request . The SBA does not require life insurance on every loan so check with your lender to determine what the requirements are . The SBA website has a loan checklist you can download . If your lender does require life insurance , you can use an existing policy assuming it meets the collateral requirements laid out by the lender or you can purchase a new policy for the exact amount of coverage required by the lender . The best idea is to check with the lender to see whats required .
Homeowners insurance is mandatory because the house is thecollateral on the debt that you owe the lender . If you did n't pay your mortgage then the bank has the right to foreclose on your property and sell it to recoup the money that they lent you . The lender protects their collateral by being listed on your homeowner policy as `` Loss Payee '' . -LRB- The one paid when a loss happens -RRB- . If their collateral -LRB- your home -RRB- burns up in a fire , and then someone stops paying their mortgage , they would have no asset and no mortgage payments coming in . Item of note : If you decide that you do n't want to have homeowners coverage on the home , the lender can add insurance -LRB- that only protects their interest in the home -RRB- and make you , the homeowner/mortgagee , pay for it on top of their mortgage payment . It is one of the many clauses that you initialed when you signed your mortgage agreement .
The Mortgage Company or lender have certain rights if you fail to do what you have promised to do in your contract -LRB- mortgage or loan agreement . -RRB- Placing coverage is a right retained by most lenders . When you apply for a mortgage or loan you promise to insure the home or car and name the mortgagee or lender as a loss payee or additional insured . If you dont do that , they havent any coverage on their collateral and so they will issue a policy . These are frequently short term policies because they are so expensive . This is not a subject you want to find out about through experience .
A lender will require that you provide insurance to cover their interest in your home . That is when you will be required to obtain insurance . Failure to provide that insurance allows the lender to place that coverage and charge the premium to you . However , you should purchase a homeowners policy anytime that you can not sustain the economic consequences of a lawsuit or loss of your home to fire or other specified peril .
Often the wording in a loan application will call for hazard insurance . A homeowners policy meets that requirement . A homeowners policy might provide more coverage than is demanded by the lender ; however , the lenders are used to seeing a homeowners policy . You can check with a trusted insurance agent to see what the agent recommends .
Several things can happen if you lapse your homeowners insurance . If you carry a loan on your home your lender can force place insurance at usually a significantly higher rate simply because it is a requirement of your loan that you carry homeowners insurance . Also lapsing your homeowners insurance can make it very difficult to obtain a new policy since many carriers will not take a client who has a lapse .
Not always . It all depends on how the loan is structired from the beginning -LRB- or refinancing -RRB- of the loan . Some lenders REQUIRE that it be part of your escrow account along with your taxes . If it is NOT part of your escrow account , you can always make monthly payments . If you do NOT have your OWN home insurance , a lender will sometimes place `` FORCED PLACEMENT '' coverage on your home to protect the lenders ' interests .
In California transfer of property is handled by a title company . They receive a list of requirement from the lender . In most cases the lender requires hazard insurance that will protect the lenders interest in the property from loss due to a specified peril . In most cases a homeowner policy is the policy that most adequately fits that requirement . There are other forms of home insurance and some of those might meet the lenders requirement . It is the responsibility of the title company to make sure that there is current insurance on the dwelling prior to closing and transferring the property .
The first thing you need to do is to refer to the bylaws of your condominiumassociation . These should stipulate the requirements of coverage for unit owners . It will also give you an idea of what is and is not covered by the master policy that the association carries -LRB- assuming that they have a master policy , as not all do . -RRB- Next , you would need to find an agent / broker that can place an HO-6 -LRB- Homeowner Insurance specifically designed for condominiums -RRB- for you . Also , if you have a mortgage on the unit , your lender may require you to carry coverage of certain limit to protect their interest , or they may force place coverage on your loan -LRB- this is usually expensive and only protects their loan amount and not your liability or contents . -RRB- Make sure you consider loss assessment coverage for any special assessments that may arise from the condominium association . Hope this helps .
It is not `` needed '' unless a lender gave you money to buy the house - then it definitely is needed . But even if your home was paid for , if you had a dog -LRB- dog bites -RRB- , have a pool -LRB- slip and falls -RRB- or entertain at home - then you 'd want one to protect you from liability claims of other 's . Plus , not only are your personal belongings covered at home , they are covered when traveling , in your car , at a hotel , on vacation or at a storage place . So it is really a smart consumer idea to keep a homeowner policy in place .
Aside from possible restrictions imposed by your lender , changing home insurance companies is quite simple . There are two issues to consider , who is actually paying the premium -LRB- frequently the lender through an impound account , -RRB- and how does the current insurance company cancel policies -LRB- there are two normal techniques , pro-rata and short-rate . -RRB- It is best to secure coverage with the new company first and then notify the lender or the insurance company directly . Occasionally the losing company will require submission of evidence of insurance from the new company , however , that is easily obtainable . The lender might have a bit of a problem in that they will need to pay the premium on the new policy and that will sometimes come due prior to receiving a refund from the cancelled policy . Work with your lender on this .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Long Does Life Insurance Underwriting Take ?
Life Insurance underwriting takes as long as it takes the life insurance underwriter to collect all the data needed to approve your policy . If you apply for a policy that does not need any exam or medical records , the process may take less than 24 hours . If they do not require an exam but can order medical records , it will take as long as it takes you or your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- to provide those records . If they require an exam , you will not be approved until at least 3 days after you take the exam . In other words , the faster you and your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- respond to the underwriter 's requests , the shorter the time it generally takes for your policy to be approved . However , things can get held up if life insurance companies get behind , the paramed examiner will not work with you to set up your exam , your doctor 's office is slow to provide your medical records to the life insurance company , and/or additional medical records must be ordered weeks or months into the process . Above all , a good Case Manager who regularly communicates with you and the insurance company can shave time off the underwriting process . Using an agency that has great customer service may not only help speed things up , it may be the key to getting your life insurance put into effect , period .
How long can underwriting take ? Anyway from a few days to several months . Some plans do not do a deep search and may only take a day or two . Expect to pay a lot for coverage from companies who offer these plans . They 've already assumed yes answers to the unasked questions . Most fully underwritten plans will take about 60 days from application submittal to policy issue , which also is reflected in the price in a positive way for the purchaser .
Guaranteed and simplified issue can take up to a week with life insurance companies who are leaders in jet issue . Conventional underwriting has time components to the process . The first is gathering all requirements for review . The second is the review process , which from company to company can be as much as a 30 day difference . The third is the final underwriting offer and acceptance by the owner of the policy . The best scenario with all requirements received is generally 30 days . The worst wait with all requirements received can be 90 days . During the fourth quarter these times can be acerbated by an increase in end of the year underwriting due to impaired risk submissions .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
Life Insurance underwriting takes as long as it takes the life insurance underwriter to collect all the data needed to approve your policy . If you apply for a policy that does not need any exam or medical records , the process may take less than 24 hours . If they do not require an exam but can order medical records , it will take as long as it takes you or your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- to provide those records . If they require an exam , you will not be approved until at least 3 days after you take the exam . In other words , the faster you and your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- respond to the underwriter 's requests , the shorter the time it generally takes for your policy to be approved . However , things can get held up if life insurance companies get behind , the paramed examiner will not work with you to set up your exam , your doctor 's office is slow to provide your medical records to the life insurance company , and/or additional medical records must be ordered weeks or months into the process . Above all , a good Case Manager who regularly communicates with you and the insurance company can shave time off the underwriting process . Using an agency that has great customer service may not only help speed things up , it may be the key to getting your life insurance put into effect , period .
How long does it take for life insurance to be in underwriting ? Forever it seems . Depending on the individual it can take anywhere from 4 to 12 weeks or more . Why ? The life insurance underwriting process is really a hurry up and wait process . That is underwriting can be very busy for a day with questions and requests being sent out and then it becomes a wait for the requests to return to the underwriter . The waiting is what adds time to underwriting .
I am so glad you asked this question . Life insurance is an underwriting-driven sale . A well-managed underwriting process will yield both good pricing and good service . This is what you need to keep the client satisfied . The underwriter has the final word . At the same time , the client , the broker , the general agent , the case manager and the underwriter all collaborate in making things happen . In addition , third-parties such as physicians offices , and advisers such as accountants and attorneys and bankers , all have a role to play . Let me give you some examples of how things could work the right way , and also the wrong way . The right way can get you an approval in a matter of weeks . The wrong way can drag it out to months and months and months . First of all , you as the client must go through full disclosure . Answer every question thoroughly and accurately . Make sure you get prequalified so that any underwriting challenges are addressed before you submit a formal application . You might have to clarify elements of your medical history . You might have to give details on risky activities such as mountain climbing a scuba diving . Amendments to physician records may be needed . If all this information is collected up front , then you can benefit in two ways . First of all you can be confident that you have both competitive and reliable quotes . Your application should be approved at the rate quoted . In addition , the underwriting process should run more smoothly because a number of underwriting requirements have already been obtained . If you dont get prequalified , and underwriting challenges are not addressed before hand , then all the time needed to do so will delay the formal underwriting process . It is also important to get the insurance exam completed quickly . Those lab and test results are essential to evaluating the level of risk you present . It may be that your blood chemistry is off the day you take the exam , and that might raise some questions . You might even have to repeat the exam . Or clarification may be needed from your doctor . Better to take care of these items sooner rather than later . The longer you wait in scheduling that exam , the longer the evaluation will take , and the longer it will take to remedy any emerging issues . Medical records are also a dealmaker or a dealbreaker . They too play a huge role in assessing risk . These days many physician offices are short-staffed and overloaded with bureaucratic insurance company and government requirements . They often contract with services to make copies of records . Their turnover of requests for copies of files is often slow . Bear in mind that they are paid in advance and well paid for this service . You as the patient may have to get involved to stress the importance of a faster turnaround . Many times , statements and documents from professional advisors are needed . In one case I have , I obtained a medical approval of great pricing over six months ago . However , copies of trust and buy sell agreement documents are required to get the final approval , and to issue the policies . The attorneys and accountants still havent delivered . General agents play a key role in delivering customer satisfaction . Brokers typically do not deal directly with underwriters - we deal with general agents who operate at the wholesale level . A general agent who has strong leverage with carriers will be able to deliver underwriting concessions . He or she will also be able to intervene as needed and advocate on behalf of the client and broker if snags pop up during underwriting . Things can happen . Sometimes one underwriter will prequalify a case , and another will formally underwrite it . These two may not agree on what the price should be . The general agent needs to stay on top of this and get the dispute resolved as quickly as possible . Case managers are also key . These are personnel inside general agencies who expedite requirements . If they are really on the ball , then the broker is notified promptly of the need for outstanding records , documents , client information , etc. . If they are slack , then requirements are filled too slowly . I think too many agencies just rely on software to give updates . This technology is useful ; at the same time , managers really do need to stay involved personally with cases and move them along . It takes the personal touch . In essence , with the right team approach and cooperation from all involved , then things can happen relatively quickly . The broker needs to treat underwriting as such and provide proper direction . Without this leadership , there is so much room for error that underwriting can become a nightmare .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance ? Well , generally speaking , it takes about 60 days . You 're going to have to fill out an application . You 're going to have to take a paramed exam . They 're going to order attending physician statements from your doctor . So when you do full underwriting , it takes between 60 days , and sometimes , depending upon if the carrier is very popular , it could take longer , up to 90 days . Keep in mind , if you do n't want to go through the full underwriting process , you could do simplified issue or you could do guaranteed issue . That would cut the time down . What you 're giving up by doing that is , without full underwriting , you 're just going to be used ... the boilerplate that they 're going to use for simplified and guaranteed is not going to be as cutting edge from a price point of view . You 'll probably wind up paying a little bit more . But if you want to really expedite your issue and get your policy in place , those two ideas could be a way to go .
Anyone can apply to get long term insurance , however there is underwriting involved . Unlike with life insurance , where the insurance companies figures out how long before you die . With LTC insurance , the insurance company figures out how long you will live . Underwriting can be difficult to pass if you have a history of health problems . Many Annuities now come with Long Term Care riders , in the event you need to go into a nursing home , where the account value doubles , or triples . Also a new type of life insurance policy allows an accelerated death benefit , in the event you have a critical illness , or need to go into a nursing home . This policy allows you to take part of your death benefit , while leaving something to your beneficiaries .
Applying for Disability Insurance is similar to applying for Life Insurance . You must complete and submit the application , take a free insurance exam , and wait for the underwriter to review everything to determine approval . If there are medical records that need to be ordered , the length of time it takes to get the Disability Insurance will depend partly on how long it takes the doctor 's office to provide medical records . If you are asking how long it takes to receive the benefit from a Disability Insurance policy , that depends on the elimination period chosen .
It can take from hours to months to be approved for life insurance . If you are applying for a simplified issue policy that requires no exam or medical records , can be signed digitally and approved on the phone , it may go into effect very quickly . The cons : this type of policy does not dig too deep , and can decline you very easily if you do not fit their exact criteria . They also usually charge higher rates to cover the risk of not knowing everything about you . The pros are that you get by without the hassle of an exam and can get the coverage very quickly . When applying for a larger policy that does require an exam and medical records , the time in underwriting largely depends on when you schedule your exam and how long it takes for your doctor 's office to send your records to the life insurance company . Another thing that can hold up approval is if you saw a doctor that the underwriter wants input from , but records were not ordered from that doctor , or the doctor has left and no one knows where those records are . Finally , an insurance website or agency that is not skilled at working this type of case can slow things down by simply not knowing how to stay on top of cases like this . To speed up approvals for a case involving exam and medical records : 1 -RRB- use an agent who has experience in impaired risk underwriting ; 2 -RRB- list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , and all doctors who made your diagnoses ; 3 -RRB- schedule your exam ASAP ; 4 -RRB- notify your doctors that medical records will be ordered , or obtain the records yourself ; and 5 -RRB- answer all questions from your agent and/or case manager promptly . These tips can cut the time for approval , even in a complicated case , from months to weeks .
In the land of Long-term Care Insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- , the word `` group '' roughly means `` guaranteed issue '' . Guaranteed issue means that all one has to do is apply and coverage will be issued - no formal underwriting . It takes a pretty big group for an insurance company to take on the risk of true group LTCi . I do n't believe any carriers provide it anymore , although much of it was sold previously and is still in force . Some carriers will still write `` simplified issue '' group wherein the applicant must answer 4 or 5 questions in the negative to qualify . If they answer `` yes '' to any of the questions , the insurance company may still consider them , but only if they authorize the insurance company to look at their medical records and maybe call them for an underwriting interview over the phone . Only a few carriers are still in this market segment of LTCi , however . Carriers will provide a small discount of 5 % or so to smaller numbers of applicants that are successfully underwritten and all work for the same employer . The minimum number depends on the carrier , but it is usually a minimum of 5 - 7 FTE . This is called `` multi-life '' long-term care insurance and is not true group . But , people refer to it that way.Multi-life underwriting may be `` simplified '' , or `` modified - simplified '' . Regardless , some underwriting does take place and a person may not qualify medically . In the past , if enough people in a multi-life situation qualified for coverage , a carrier would accept one person who did n't qualify medically and issue a base contract of coverage to that person . That accommodation is not actively marketed these days and may only be available under special conditions . With a multi-life policy , the insured owns his/her own policy and can take it with them when they leave employment . The discounted premium is portable , too.Multi-life may be worth looking into if the company only wants to insure executives , owners or key occupation classes . LTCi is not yet subject to ERISA rules , so companies can `` carve out '' who they want to provide this kind of insurance to . Payment of premiums by the corporation -LRB- especially C-corps -RRB- may qualify as a health insurance expense and deductible for tax purposes , as well . But , before assuming any special treatment of premium payments , one should consult with a qualified tax professional.Otherwise , there is no true group LTCi and fewer `` deals '' any more for LTCi .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
Long Term Care Insurance is a morbidity insurance product . Medical underwriting investigates health history and current medical condition . Unlike life insurance which is a mortality insurance product , long term care underwrites prior events both injury and disease . As we age , morbidity events are more likely to occur . If the morbidity underwriting debits are too negative to overcome health credits from an underwriting balance sheet point of view , the application will be denied . Its important to secure long term care insurance when youre young and healthy , when the underwriting classifications are more favorable and the premium is less expensive .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
Yes , it does . Check out Peggys reply to identify the subsidiaries through which it markets the product . I have found that with regards to life insurance , this carrier has its strong points and its weak points in underwriting . Every carrier does . This is because each carrier develops a certain amount of sophistication and expertise with certain types of mortality risks . When you think about it , there are dozens of risk factors that are considered in life insurance underwriting . Every carrier can not achieve an advanced level of understanding and comfort with everyone of them . So they tend to specialize . Lets suppose a carrier has a cardiologist as a chief of underwriting . You can bet that they will be very competitive and heart-related cases . Perhaps one of the executives of the company has a private pilot license . You know they will be very confident underwriting people who also fly . This is how the business works . Its really a question of which carrier would be most aggressive in applying underwriting standards to your particular risk . Once that carrier is selected , then it is the brokers job to advocate on your behalf . Every potential available credit should be identified . The more credits you get for both medical and lifestyle factors , the lower your price will be .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Life Insurance Proceeds Be Garnished ?
While I am not an attorney and can not speak for every situation , in most cases life insurance proceeds are protect from creditors and probate.There may be some situations that could result in garnishment however in most cases the answer would be no . Check with your attorney to verify your particular situation .
Generally speaking , if the life insurance policy had a person named as Beneficiary , and the Insured person passed away , the benefits from that policy should go to the Beneficiary and be safe from garnishment for child support -LRB- if the garnishment was against the Insured -RRB- . If the Beneficiary stated in the policy is the estate , then the life insurance could be garnished for child support owed by the deceased . If the child support is owed by the Beneficiary , rules regarding wage garnishments against the Beneficiary of the life insurance proceeds vary by state . If you owe child support and are the Beneficiary of a life insurance policy in which the Insured passed away , there has to be a judgement made against you . Then , it varies by state whether any of the life insurance proceeds can be taken away from you for child support payment . You should contact legal counsel for the answer to this question .
If someone dies while having a garnishment against them , the beneficiary will not be subject to the garnishment that was against the insured person . If it is the beneficiary who has a garnishment against them , the amount of the insurance proceeds that can be garnisheddepends on the rules of the state . Consult an attorney if your wages are being garnished and you are set to become the beneficiary of a life insurance policy , or have recently received proceeds of a life insurance policy .
If you are the beneficiary of a life insurance policy and you have a wage garnishment out against you , what can be garnished depends on the rules of the state . Federal law sets limits on what can be garnished , but states can add to those limitations . Consult an attorney if your wages are being garnished and you are set to become the beneficiary of a life insurance policy , or have recently received proceeds of a life insurance policy . If it is the deceased person who was insured by the life insurance policy whose wage were being garnished , or who owed substantial debt , the money received by the beneficiary is usually safe from creditors to whom the deceased owed money . If the insured person left his money to his estate , or there were no living beneficiaries on his policy to receive the death benefit , then creditors have access to money left to the estate . But money left to a person as beneficiary belongs to the beneficiary and is not accessible to creditors for the deceased .
While Disability Insurance may be exempt from garnishment in your state , if your funds are comingled with your other funds in your bank account , it is possible for your bank account to be garnished . So it is a good idea to set up a separate bank account for your Disability benefits . If you are ordered by the court to pay child support , or have unpaid bills , then your Disability Insurance proceeds may be subject to garnishment .
As with so many things in life , the answer is `` it depends '' . If you are talking about Social Security disability benefits it will depend upon the type of disability benefit you are receiving . Supplemental Security Income -LRB- SSI -RRB- disability benefits , which are for certain low income individuals e.g. - blind , aged , disabled and below certain income thresholds -RRB- who do not qualify for regular Social Security Disability can not have their SSI payments garnished for child support . On the other hand , standard Social Security Disability payments can be garnished to meet child support obligations . While it is much more complicated , it is also possible that a portion of VA disability benefits can be garnished for child support . Finally , if you are receiving disability payments through an individual or group disability insurance policy those payments can be garnished for child support purposes though the specifics vary from state to state .
If you are the beneficiary of a life insurance policy and it is the deceased who was under garnishment , your life insurance benefit can not be garnished on behalf of the deceased . If you get a life insurance benefit and you are the one who owes money , federal and state law determine how much -LRB- if any -RRB- of the death benefit can be garnished .
Whether private disability insurance can be garnished depends on the state in which you live . However , if you put your disability insurance payments in a bank account with other funds , the bank account can be garnished . So it is a good idea to keep those funds separate . Also , if you owe child support or back payments on a bill , even disability insurance payments can usually be garnished .
The law varies from state to state regarding private disability insurance payments . If such payments are exempted from garnishment in your state , you should put those payments in a separate checking account . If they are mixed with your other funds , that checking account could be garnished . If you owe child support or payment on bills , your disability insurance payments may be garnished .
If you are asking whether the credit card company can garnish life insurance proceeds to pay off credit card debt left by the deceased , the answer is no , as long as the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is a living person . Creditors can go after the estate of the deceased for payment , so if the the beneficiary of the policy is the insured person 's `` estate '' , then the credit card company could have a shot at collecting from the life insurance benefit . If you are asking whether the cost of life insurance is counted as credit card debt , the answer is again no , not unless premiums are charged to a credit card .
While I am not an attorney and can not speak for every situation , in most cases life insurance proceeds are protect from creditors and probate.There may be some situations that could result in garnishment however in most cases the answer would be no . Check with your attorney to verify your particular situation .
Life Insurance policies are paid out lump sum to the benificiary , so , this indicates that the benificiary has control of all monies and that the creditors will have no control for garnishment . Garnishment are for wages yet Life Insurance is a death benefit paid out at time of death of the policy holder to the beneficiary . This is not matter who has control of the policy at any time .
I have to take a small leap and assume you are talking about the death benefit you might have received or have received . Life Insurance itself can not be garnished however if the courts know you are receiving a death benefit , they may go after your bank accounts , etc. . Garnishments are generally taken from your salary at your place of employment . If this does not answer your question , please elaborate and get back to me . Thank you .
If you are renting an apartment , condo or home to live , you should have renter 's insurance . Not only will renter 's insurance cover your personal Property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but it also covers liability . Several years ago , I had a young women come into my office looking for advice on what she should do . She had been visiting her cousin , who lived in a town home . She went out on the back patio and lit a cigarette , smoked it & was sure she put it out in the dirt of a nearby planter . She and her cousin went out for dinner , only to return to the town home & the town home adjoined to be full a blaze with fire trucks putting out the fire . She was determined to be a fault . The insurance company of the adjoining home paid the claim and then subrogated -LRB- sued -RRB- her for the damages -LRB- ~ $ 105,000 -RRB- . Had she had renter 's insurance , it would have paid the claim under her liability portion of the policy . Instead , her wages were garnished and will continue to be garnished until the claim is paid in full .
In States that require Liability Insurance you can lose your license . In addition most companies will charge a higher rate for being without insurance . This law is a protection for both you and the other individual that may be involved in an accident that was your fault . The other individual can receive the medical treatment he needs and have his auto restored , you are protected from going through a lengthy lawsuit and having your wage garnished .
That is a great question ! I believe that life insurance is a must , and while it can be used as part of a retirement plan , I 'm not real big on advising so . Here 's why - The general purpose for a life insurance policy is so that you can transfer wealth , and pay final expenses . Your beneficiary receives the tax free benefits , and your final expenses are not passed onto them . If your main goal is to gut your policy and live off the cash value in it , that defeats the purpose of the wealth transfer . If the idea is to garnish tax free income in retirement , a Roth IRA would be a far better investment vehicle , and its balance can be left to a beneficiary . A smarter way to use your money , though lesser commission for an agent . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
By far one of the most cost effective coverage options available is Renters Insurance . A policy for Renters Insurance not only covers the personal property of the insured for loss , damage or theft anywhere in the world , but also provides a level of Personal Liability insurance to protect the insured should they be sued for causing damage or injury to another person or their property - again , anywhere in the world this may have occurred . Typically , these policies provide for $ 100,000 in Personal Liability coverage , and can be increased for those who may want more coverage as well . Why would you want Personal Liability insurance ? I can tell you a hundred stories of renters who did n't have this coverage and were sued for something that happened , completely out of their control , and had to have their wages garnished to pay off the law suit .
I am not an attorney , but as far as I know a creditor can not garnish disability benefits . The benefits should be protected under the privacy act . I know it to be true for Tennessee and some other states , but I ca n't confirm all 52 states . Verify with an attorney but I am confident the benefits are free from creditors .
Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- as of January 1 , 2014 , with limited exceptions Americans are required to have major medical insurance that meets the requirements of the Affordable Care Act . If you do not have such coverage in effect then you will be subject to a tax penalty when you do your 2015 taxes in 2015 . The penalty for 2014 is $ 95 per adult & $ 47.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 285 per family -RRB- or 1 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , whichever is greater . This tax penalty will increase in subsequent years . However , the tax penalty can only be recovered by the IRS from an income tax refund that an individual or family is entitled to . Your bank account or wages can not be garnished by the IRS to assess the tax penalty .
Renter 's insurance is important for two reasons . First , it covers your personal property -LRB- furniture , tv , audio system , clothes , dishes , etc -RRB- against loss . Second , it provides liability coverage . Let 's suppose you were cooking and a fire began because your attention was directed away . The fire that caused the damage was your fault , because you were negligent . The damage to the home or apartment you were renting may be more than what everything you own . In a recent case where the tenant did not have renter 's insurance , the cost of the damageswas recovered by garnishing the tenant 's wages by 30 % until the entire cost of the damages was recovered .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
When Is The Best Time To Buy Long Term Care Insurance ?
The best time to buy Long Term Care Insurance is while you can still qualify for it , and while you can lock in the best rate . Around age 50-55 is a popular time because people start to experience hypertension and other signs of aging . As with most insurance , the best time is when it starts to gnaw at you . Even if you think it 's too late , it 's often best to follow your gut .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
Long term care insurance is a morbidity product that is underwritten on the basis on medical and behavioral information . Medical information is based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Behavioral information is based on motor vehicle records , vocational and recreational hazards . Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
People buy long term care insurance to protect their assets in case they should need to pay for expensive care for themselves for an extended period of time -LRB- months to years -RRB- . When someone receives long term care , they must pay out of pocket , because Medicare does not pay it -LRB- beyond , possibly , under one month at that start , followed by 80 days of partial payment , but only if qualified -RRB- . When their liquid assets run out , they must tap into other assets , even the value of their home , if no remaining spouse lives there . When assets are nearly depleted , they can receive Medicaid funding , but not before that . Having Long Term Care insurance helps avoid that scenario , as the policy will pay for the care until policy funds run out . If a Partnership plan , assets are protected up to the amount of coverage purchased . There are other reasons buy Long Term Care Insurance , as well . One of the main ones is being able to provide for their own care of their choice , and not burdening loved ones with that worry .
Stand alone long term care insurance policies can be very expensive and generally are not a fixed premium so may well go up over time . When you purchase long term care as a rider on a whole life policy you will get the lowest premium rate for it that is available . So really then the best time to buy long term insurance is when you 're buying a whole life policy . If you already have a whole life policy without the LTC rider , you could either buy an additional policy or exchange your current policy for a new one and add the LTC rider .
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Before buying long term care insurance , it is a good idea to look at the area in which you anticipate you will be living when you reach the age where long term care may be needed , and see what their average rates for assisted living and nursing home care run . Talk to your family and get their ideas on arrangements if that type of care was needed . Review your budget and determine how much you have to spend on long term care , and tell that to your agent when you start . An agent can save you a lot of time and frustration from looking at all kinds of bells and whistles that you can not afford , when they know your budget from the start . These are some things that will help your long term care search start off on a good foot .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Can Home Insurance Companies Drop You ?
Yes , but typically it takes some very substantive issue if the policy is more than 60 days into being in effect . On fairly modest basis you can see carriers withdraw from a state or territory because their loss experience may endanger the health of the overall insurer . Also there can be situations where an insurance department sees an ongoing impairment of the carrier and proceeds to cancel all policies for the carrier . This happened in Texas following Hurricane Ike . If the property is not properly maintained , there was misrepresentation or even sometimes because it would be against public policy to continue to provide liability insurance in the face known instrumentality of putting the public in danger . You see very infrequent last item because Insurance Departments often are involved in that regard . but you can see this happening with dangerous dogs etc. . There also can be changes in exposure that were no known at inception . For example a build up combustible brush near the property . So , it generally occurs because the frequency of loss is unsustainable over time . or the conditions are changing for the worse or the insurer now recognizes some information in a loss that was not previously known .
The insurance company that is insuring your home is not required to renew coverage . If they are not going to renew , they are required by law to give you adequate notice . There is a clause that assures a lender that they too will be notified if coverage is not being renewed . A homeowners policy can be cancelled anytime that the premium is not paid when due .
That is a great question ! Yes , they can . Generally though , it is because of something that you did , and being dropped was a result of that action . For example , you missed a couple of payments , or you misrepresented something substantial on the application . You generally have to work kind of hard to get dropped , but it will happen , especially if you are a liability or high risk . Thanks for asking !
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Any Home or Auto insurance company can drop you . Home insurance is not guaranteed renewable . The company has a right to drop you or raise your premium at each renewal . This can be done because of claims experience , deterioration and maintenance of your home , or in some cases a company will pull out of an area or state completely . This happened in Florida because of the frequency of hurricanes .
That is a great question . The answer is you bet , if you 've done something to deserve it . They can not just decide one day to drop you , but if you have given them a good reason , like misrepresentation of facts , or non-payment of your policy , they will drop you like a bad habit . You may also get dropped for committing an intoxicant related felony like vehicular manslaughter . In any event , the only way they will drop you is if you have earned it . Thanks for asking !
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
The easy answer to drop your term life insurance is when you goal for that plan is met . For example , if you purchased the plan to cover a 30 year mortgage and paid it off early and have no further need for the protection you should drop it . If the term is met and the rates increased drastically you may want to drop it and apply for another policy if your health is still good . Another scenario may be retirement and the nest egg is fully funded with no unforeseen circumstances , it could be time to drop it or convert it to permanent life insurance or paid up life insurance if the need for a death benefit still exists .
Unfortunately , the homeowners insurance company has the `` right '' non-renew your coverage each year they renew the policy . It depends on your specific state if they can drop you mid-policy or not . They normally ca n't drop you mid-policy unless they discover a material misrepresentation by you . They can drop you for non-payment , but for a claim they can only non-renew your policy . If you have additional questions please let me know .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
The single best thing you can do is shop around with other auto insurance companies . Each company is unique in that they have their own appetite for what they like and do n't like . You may fit right into some company 's `` sweet spot '' . But you will never know which companies can beat your current rates . As far as lowering premium on an active policy , you have to be careful . Normally when drivers lower their coverages or cut them out altogether , they tend to make cuts in the wrong areas . It 's important to understand the difference between a controlled risk and an uncontrolled risk . A controlled risk is one where by lowering or dropping coverage , you know the exact dollar amount of the extra risk you are taking on . This includes raising your deductibles on comprehensive and collision coverage -LRB- or dropping it altogether -RRB- , dropping additional coverage such as rental and roadside assistance/towing . Stay away from lowering uncontrolled risks ! Namely liability coverage and uninsured motorist bodily injury coverage . This is where people get burned ! Keep both of these as high as you can afford them .
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
You employer may drop your health insurance . However , there are many underwater stones involved with this executive decision . For example , the employer can not drop the coverage for you only , except when you , for example moved from Full Time to Part Time and in order to be eligible for benefits you must work full time . Or may be you were moved from employee status to 1099 ? If you 've learned that your employer dropped your health insurance , but other employees of the company still receive this benefit - contact a lawyer . This could be a basis for a lawsuit against your employer .
Great question ! There would be a couple of immediate results . The first is that you would no longer have the benefit of insurance to help pay for costs should you become sick or injured . Those costs can be devastating to your financial stability . The second is that under the Affordable Care Act , there are penalties for not having insurance , that are leveled when you file your taxes for this year . The health insurance companies limit the ability to enroll in their programs , and many workplace plans will not drop you until the open enrollment period unless you meet specified conditions.Without knowing the reason that you are considering dropping your coverage , I would ask that you would have a plan in place before you actually do drop your coverage . If I can provide more information , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Can you drop your husband from your health insurance ? Well the answer may vary by state . You may be able to drop your husband , but he will have to agree in writing for it to be done . The reason for this is when a couple divorces a spouse sometimes drops the others coverage without their knowledge . Sort of like emptying the bank account .
Many people worry that their life insurance policies will drop them if they develop a health condition , as can happen with health insurance . The fact is , if you filled out your life insurance application honestly , complied with whatever they asked you to do , and got a policy , that policy is yours to keep . You can have a heart attack the next month and it will pay the death benefit . You can start smoking the next year and it will pay the death benefit . You can not be dropped over something you did not know ahead of time . Given that type of guarantee , why not lock your life insurance policy in for as long as you can . If you can get coverage for 30 years or a lifetime instead of 10 , have a need for longer coverage , and can afford it , no one can take it away from you as long you keep paying the premiums .
Dropping collision on your car depends on how much you wish to self insure . As long as you do not have a loan you can drop collision anytime . However one of the more common times to consider dropping collision is if your vehicle is worth $ 3500.00 or less . The reason for this thinking is this is the amount uninsured motorist property damage would pick up in the event you are hit by someone with no insurance . Of course your still on your own if you cause the accident or if your involved in a hit and run type situation where you do n't know who caused the accident . You may want to look at what you actually are paying for collision coverage and what the vehicle is worth in a total loss since this is all your going to get .
Several things can get you dropped from your auto insurance policy . One could be not making your payments which could result in policy termination . However assuming you make your payment on time the main reason is increased risk . A poor driving record is usually the primary contributor of your policy being non renewed . DUI 's andwrecklessdriving are top of the list or a combination of multiple accidents and moving violations will do it . You wo n't be cancelled for one or sometimes even two accidents but have that third one and in most cases you may be dropped . There are some carriers that do have a no drop promise so something to consider .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can You Have Two Disability Insurance Policies ?
Yes you can . You can have multiple disability policies as long as the total benefit amount can be validated with tax returns and/or W2 information . Keep in mid that you can add retirement contributions to the total earnings amount to increase coverage . And if you 're a business you may be able to add disability overhead insurance as well .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
The two main types of disability insurance are short term disability , and long term disability insurance . Short term disability insurance pays fairly quickly after a disabling illness or injury occurs , and benefits generally last no longer than two years . Long term disability insurance has a longer waiting period until it pays , usually around 90 days . Then it can last a number of years or all the way to retirement in the event of a disability that continues that long .
There are several reasons to considering buying Supplemental Disability Insurance . 1 -RRB- Group Disability policies usually pay 60 % of your income in event of disability , and if your employer paid the premiums , the benefits are taxed . Thus , the benefit you actually receive may be approx 45 % of your income . Supplemental Disability Insurance is not taxed and can possibly raise this benefit to 70 % to 80 % of your income . 2 -RRB- Any group benefit will be lost when you leave the group . Having Supplemental Disability Insurance can be valuable if you no longer qualify for Disability Insurance upon separating from a job and its group benefits . 3 -RRB- Group Disability coverage is often `` own occupation '' the first two years , then changes so that you will no longer receive your benefits if you can work at ANY job , not just your OWN type of job . Supplemental Disability Insurance can extend the own occupation feature to last longer than two years . You could also add other features such as a Cost of Living Adjustment rider .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
Disability insurance is an insurance policy that replaces up to 70 % of your income should you become injured or ill and can no longer preform your normal duties of your current occupation . There are two basic types of disability insurance . The first is called short term disability which pays after a short elimination period to cover immediate living expenses . Most short term policies expire within two years . The second type of disability insurance is long term . These policies cover income for a longer period of time from two years to age 67 years old .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Under your current situation I would not carry the old disability policy . Disability insurance is a coordinated product in the sense that any number of policies will not pay more than the maximum scheduled amount usually no greater than 70 % The only reason to carry two different disability insurance policies is if you purchase a short term and a long term disability insurance policy . The long term policy may have an extended elimination period of 90 days or 180 days before benefits commence . A short term disability plan can commence within in days and pay benefits up to the elimination period of the long term plan . What you are describing sounds like two long term disability plan and would not make financial sense to keep the other policy .
There are two products provided through Social Security : 1 -RRB- Social Security Disability Insurance and 2 -RRB- SSI , or Supplemental Security Income . Social Security Disability Insurance -LRB- commonly referred to as `` Disability '' is for people who have become disabled . They will get Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . Those on SSI are disabled or blind and also have limited income and resources . In most states , they are usually automatically eligible for Medicaid when they go on SSI .
Yes , you can have two or more policies , as long as you qualify financially for the total amount of coverage . Some mixed families take out two policies , rather than have their biological children and stepchildren have to split the same policy proceeds . Or , they take two policies so their divorced spouse has a different policy than their current spouse . Those who own business policies may need to keep them separate from personal policies for tax reasons . Sometimes having two policies is better than one , because the death benefit will be covering two completely different types of needs . E.g. . You might want a small policy to cover your funeral expenses , which would necessitate some type of permanent insurance . But you might also want a larger policy to pay off your mortgage , and 10 year Term -LRB- which usually costs much less than Whole or Universal Life -RRB- may be a much more economical choice for that particular need .
The types of Disability Insurance that you can buy on your own come in two types : Short Term Disability Insurance and Long Term Disability Insurance . Of the two , Long Term Disability Insurance is most commonly purchased . When provided by an employer , Sick Leave is also a type of Short Term Disability Insurance .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Can you have two disability policies ? Yes , and if you do it right , you can insure 100 % of your income . A person can buy an individual disability policy first for full benefit and then be covered by a group disability plan for full benefit . It is actually possible to have more than 100 % coverage if your situation works this way . There is no provision in either policy that reduces benefit to 100 % . Now if you have group before you have individual you usually will be capped at 70 % of income as the maximum between the two types of coverage .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
Yes , life insurance in force at the death of the life insured pays out the death benefit proceeds once proof of death has been submitted . The life insurer can not deny a claim unless due to either suicide in the first two policy years or a material misrepresentation in the first two years of the policy . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . Life insurance is something you need to qualify for in advance - the insured must be insurable , the owner must have an insurable interest , etc. . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in cases of fraud .
You may have group disability insurance available to you through your employer , however , you will find generally find stronger coverage through an individual disability insurance plan . A disability is a sickness or injury which interferes in your ability to work and earn a living . In disability insurance , there 's 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST IMPORTANT factor to look at in a policy . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True own occupation is the best definition you can have . Gainful occupation is commonly seen in group policies and offers the least coverage . One of the drawbacks of group coverage is if your employment is terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual policy goes with you wherever you go and generally features stronger coverage and a better definition of disability -LRB- a true own occupation or modified own occupation definition -RRB- . You want to buy your disability insurance when you 're healthy - this type of coverage is much more in depth than life and health insurance . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may face an exclusion rider for the condition under a given policy or be postponed for the coverage until it 's resolved . Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance that has moving parts to policies . If you 're looking to apply for coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and have experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish and make the process as seemless as possible . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What The Best Disability Insurance ?
It truly depends on your occupation and your medical history . For high risk jobs , a sub-standard carry like Lloyds of London or Fidelity offers great products . If you 're a physician , Standard , Principal or MetLife can offer very competitive rates . If you 're considering purchasing DI , ask your agent to shop around and provide you with multiple quotes . Remember , just because it 's the cheapest , does n't mean it 's the best !
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What type of disability insurance should I get ? The one that provides you the best definiton of disability that you can afford . Disability insurance is all about the definition of what is a `` disability '' . What you 'll find is the best disability plans have the fewest words in describing what disability is . Without a solid definition , you have a policy you pay for , that does n't pay you back when you have a claim .
What to look for in Disability Insurance ? While there are many options to consider with disability insurance , a `` good '' disability policy comes down to one defining sentence . The most important thing is `` the definition of what disability IS . '' You see payment from a disability plan all comes down to what qualifies as a disability based on the definition of disability in the contract -LRB- policy -RRB- . If it is not simple and straight forward in this definition , you might want to look elsewhere . Pretty much beyond the first couple sentences about the definition of disability in a DI policy are terms where they take away from the definition , they exclude and make exceptions . The best policies are straight forward without a lot of fluff when it comes to that definition . And with a disability policy , words are everything .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Either you are referring to the best disability insurance company or the best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance . There are several excellent disability companies in the disability market place . One of the best is The Standard . The best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance is to determine if you can expense the premium as a business deduction and apply for 80 % of your compensation . While it is true that any benefits received will be subject to ordinary income tax , a deduction today is worth the risk of taxable event in the future . Nondeductible disability protects up to 60 % of your compensation with tax free distribution of benefits . If youre in a high tax bracket , the spread in benefits -LRB- 80 % versus 60 % -RRB- and the savings in the annual deduction are incentives to expense the premium if you have a legitimate business . Keep in mind that you can also buy disability insurance to cover your qualified plan contributions as well .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
The word `` best '' is so subjective . Best what ? Best rates ? Best underwriting ? Best customer service ? Best claims payment history ? When you look at Insurance , compare it to purchasing an automobile . You have Mercedes , BMW , Toyota , Ford , Chrysler , Volvo . Which car is best ? Thats hard to say . Each of these makers produce cars that will start and take you to your destination . They can come with a lot of the things that make our car ride enjoyable . But what do you want ? Comfort ? Style ? Good gas mileage ? Ability to be driven for years ? High mileage capability ? It all depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay to get it . Insurance is the same way . Talk to an agent and clearly define what you want . Then look for companies that offer that product . Then you can compare prices , look into how they handle claims , customer service , etc. . Finally , realize that most Insurance companies -LRB- due to heavy regulations -RRB- have to meet certain standards to remain an Insurance company . That being said you can usually find a good fit for your circumstances if you do your research .
What disability insurance should I get ? The one that gives you the best definition of `` disability '' . The definition is everything with these types of policies . A life insurance policy , pretty much you 're dead , they pay . With disability insurance , it comes down to the definition of disability to determine if the plan pays or not . The best definition of disability will usually be very short and straight forward because pretty much after the first couple sentences , the additional text is telling you what will change your coverage . A lot of words in this case is n't good for the consumer .
The insurance company that offers the best disability plan is the company you purchase the policy from with the best coverage at the best price . There are too many factors that are in play when buying a disability insurance policy to state if one company is the best . There are several companies that do an outstanding job with disability coverage . I recommend using an independent broker to professionally shop for the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy is the one that is going to do what you want it to for what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Pay for any damage to your home ? The Best policy would guaranty your home would be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by any cause . All policies will have exclusions or limitations . The Best policy will have the fewest exclusions or limitations . Reimburse you for loss or damage to your personal property ? The Best policy will repair or replace -LRB- new for old -RRB- your property should it be damaged from any cause . Again , most policies will have exclusions and limitations , the Best policy will have the fewest exclusions and limitations . The Best policy will include a Personal Liability limit not less than $ 300,000 and offer a good Personal Umbrella should you need or want higher limits . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur and help you return to your pre-loss position . In my opinion , the Best policy will be the one that will do all the above for the most favorable premium .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
When reviewing your disability insurance options , you should be sure to understand the differences between company contracts . With disability insurance , the key to the contract is the definition of disability and definition and requirements of the policy benefits . All disability contracts are NOT created equal . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . Guardian offers this definition and is our group 's top disability company to write business with . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Be Denied Health Insurance Coverage For A Pre Existing Condition ?
I assume you are looking for a policy that will be effective after 01/01/2014 when the Affordable Health Care Act begins to dictate that `` pre-existing conditions '' can not prevent you from obtaining coverage . If you get a policy prior to that date the insurance companies can and will underwrite the application and if your condition prevents them issuing the policy they will refuyse to write the policy
Under the new Affordable Care Act no one can be denied health care for any pre existing condition . I recommend you contact a certified agent who can help you through the process of obtaining quotes for health insurance . Depending on your financial situation you may even qualify for financial assistance .
No and yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- anyone applying for major medical health insurance coverage after January 1 , 2014 can not be denied coverage for a pre-existing health condition . Insurance coverage is guaranteed to be issued and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately . However , this does require that you enroll for individual health insurance coverage during the mandated open enrollment period which for 2014 ended on March 31st . If you failed to enroll during the open enrollment period then you can not apply for major medical insurance coverage until the next open enrollment period which begins on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . The only exceptions to this part of the law are for what are referred to as `` Change of Life Status Events '' such as marriage , divorce , losing other health insurance coverage , or having or adopting a child -LRB- as the most common examples -RRB- . For the remainder of 2014 the only options available to persons who failed to enroll during the open enrollment period would be Short Term Medical insurance or perhaps a limited benefit/indemnity policy . However , these policies do still have some underwriting question associated with them that could result in your being declined for coverage . Also , these types of health plans do not cover pre-existing health conditions and do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for being major medical coverage . Therefore , you would be subject to the individual mandate tax penalty even if you do take out one of these types of policies .
When you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older you will be in your initial Medicare Open Enrollment Period to purchase a Medicare Supplement . You have six month from when your Part B takes effect to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately with no waiting period . You can purchase a Medicare Supplement anytime you want to outside of your initial Open Enrollment Period but once your Open Enrollment Period ends you will have to answer all health questions to qualify for a Medicare Supplement . If you have a serious health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium to get the pre-existing health condition covered .
As of January 1 , 2014 all major medical insurance plans , both individual and group , can no longer have any exclusions , limitations or waiting periods for pre-existing health conditions . So , from that perspective it is not a matter of which health insurance accepts pre-existing conditions . Any health insurance plan in compliance with the Affordable Care Act has to . Now , there are Short Term Major Medical policies and some limited benefit and/or indemnity type policies out there that can still apply underwriting and can limit or exclude pre-existing conditions but these are not major medical health insurance plans that meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . In some instances people are marketing these types of products as a low cost alternative to ACA compliant health insurance plans . They provide you with some degree of financial protection but they will not shield you from the Individual Mandate tax penalty or provide you with comprehensive coverage . If you are offered a policy that does not cover pre-existing conditions that is a red flag that someone is trying to sell you a non-compliant policy - BUYER BEWARE .
Any true major medical insurance policy , group or individual , should cover treatment for Lupus as it is an autoimmune disease in the same class as arthritis . Perhaps a person who was issued an individual health insurance policy that was grandfathered under the terms of the health care reform law was issued coverage excluding Lupus as a condition of issuing the coverage but that 's about the only context I can think of where this question could arise . Certainly in the era of health care reform , especially after January 1 , 2014 , coverage for conditions such as Lupus should not be a big point of discussion . No policy issued after that date can have pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . That being said , how treatment for conditions such as Lupus are handled from a level of coverage perspective can and do vary from one insurance carrier to the next . First of all , your perception of coverage may be affected by the type of policy you have enrolled in . If you enrolled in a policy with a $ 6000 deductible then your perception might be that your condition is n't being covered when actually it is but you are n't seeing any benefits until you 've met your deductible . In other cases your insurance carrier may have treatment protocols in place that guide your physician on the methods of treatment and types of medications that must be adhered to for treatment of such a condition and these may be a departure from your past experience and usage . If you are covered under a non-compliant health plan , possibly a limited benefit or indemnity type plan , then it is quite likely you would have little or no coverage for Lupus or be subject to pre-existing condition exclusions and/or waiting periods . Short Term Medical policies , which by nature do not cover pre-existing conditions , are also another possible area where a person could find that Lupus would not be covered . But , in today 's environment , a person suffering from Lupus can get major medical coverage that covers their condition .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
You can disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to Original Medicare from January 1 thru February 14 of each year . You will need to get a Medicare Supplement and Prescription Drug Plan . If you have serious health conditions you may not be qualify for a Medicare Supplement . Depending on the pre-existing condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium because of the pre-existing condition . It would be very important to talk with a qualified agent before you make your decision to disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan .
Medicare Supplement plans can be changed anytime during the year . Just because you want to change your Medigap plan does not necessarily mean you can . When you are new to Medicare , after your Part B is activated , you have six months to enroll in any Medicare Supplement offered in your state with no health questions being asked , your acceptance is guaranteed . After your open enrollment periods ends you can apply for a Medicare Supplement later at any time but you must answer all of the health questions . If you have a serious pre-existing health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a substantially higher premium in order to get the pre-existing condition covered .
That is a great question ! One of the great things that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- did for us was remove the pre-existing condition exclusion . Health insurance companies can no longer deny you coverage because of your pre-existing condition , nor can they cap your life time expenses . When you go to enroll , head to the Healthcare marketplace , WEBSITELINK and see if you qualify for discounted insurance . A great many people do . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Health insurance for pre-existing conditions is covered through the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- . When you purchase coverage through designated Open Enrollment periods , your pre-existing conditions are covered and you can not be denied for medical underwriting reasons . A licensed broker -LRB- preferably someone that has been in the business at least 20 years -RRB- can help you compare the best options and easily enroll .
Open Enrollment under Federal law when you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older , you have a guaranteed right to buy a Medicare Supplement policy for six months . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately . After your Open Enrollment period is over you can apply for a Medicare Supplement later at any time , but you may be charged a higher rate or be denied coverage if you have serious pre-existing health conditions . This may be your only chance to get a Medicare Supplement without having to go through medical underwriting .
It depends on the plan benefits . Effective 1/1/2014 private health insurance carriers can no longer deny applicants due to pre existing medical conditions , but that does n't mean the covered services fall under the benefit details . Make sure to verify your benefits before enrolling in a plan to make sure your pre existing condition -LRB- s -RRB- are covered appropriately .
Traditional Major Medical ? No ! Group medical ? No ! Short Term medical ? Yes ! Whether on or off-exchange , if you 're purchasing long term major medical health insurance -LSB- post 2014 -RSB- you can not be denied coverage due to pre existing medical conditions . However , many pre existing conditions will still be excluded from benefits , so make sure you are applying for a plan that suits your needs .
Currently in most states you can be denied individual health insurance if your pre-existing conditions are severe or costly . As a result of Obamacare , most states do not have child only health insurance plans . In most cases you can not be denied employer group health insurance plan coverage . All this will change in 2014 when carriers can not deny you but expect premiums to be 2x current levels .
Unfortunately , the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may be denied coverage . If you are not in your initial Open Enrollment period or another Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Policy . Therefore , it 's best to get a Medigap Policy when you think you do n't need one . Often times people wait until a health condition arises because they think the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- will apply . With that said , each insurance company has unique health questions . One insurance company may deny rheumatoid arthritis while another is okay with it . In other words , do n't assume you will be denied . An independent agent can review your health history and let you know if you can apply for a Medigap policy .
This will all change very soon as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 -LRB- PPACA aka Obamacare -RRB- takes effect , but for now this very much depends on if you allow your health insurance coverage to lapse . If you do not lapse coverage and begin private coverage , then usually a pre-existing condition would be covered . If you allowed coverage to lapse and then bought private insurance , it is possible for the insurer to excluse the pre-existing condition . Once PPACA takes effect , pre-existing conditions will no longer be allowed for the most part .
That depends entirely upon what the pre-existing condition is and it 's likelihood of causing a person to become disabled . Something like common allergies would technically be a pre-existing condition but just because you may need allergy shots it is highly unlikely that such a condition would be an issue . Now , if you 've had a mild stroke and have a family history of heart disease then you are in a situation where qualifying for disability insurance would be much more difficult , if not impossible , in the individual market . Some disability insurance carriers will issue coverage that might exclude coverage if the disability is a result of the pre-existing condition . And some employer groups offer group disability coverage to their employees that may be guaranteed to be issued as least up to certain levels of financial coverage .
Private health insurance covers pre-existing conditions ... most of the time ! I 'll explain : When applying for coverage during Open Enrollment -LRB- assuming it is a qualified Exchange or Off-Exchange plan -RRB- , pre-existing conditions are covered and there will be no waiting period or surcharge applied . As an experienced health insurance broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , this issue is often discussed with customers and on our top-ranked websites . However , non-compliant plans , such as short-term policies , do not cover pre-existing conditions . If you miss Open Enrollment , these temporary plans are popular options .
You can be denied Medigap coverage if you have serious pre-existing health conditions . Once your Part B Medicare coverage is activated at age 65 or older , you have six months to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . After your Open Enrollment Period ends you can enroll in a Medigap Plan at anytime , but you could pay a higher rate or be denied coverage for serious health problems .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What 's A 403 B Retirement Plan ?
A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan is a tax-advantaged retirement savings plan under Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 for public education organizations , some 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- organizations -RRB- , cooperative hospitals , and self-employed ministers . Employee salary deferrals into a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan are made pretax and they grow tax-deferred with distributions taxable when withdrawn from the plan . 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans were also called tax-sheltered annuity .
403 -LRB- b -RRB- Plan EmployerInformation - What is a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan ? Its a great benefit to both your employees and you!A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan is a tax-deferred plan that can be set up forany public school , university , college or non-profit 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- organization . Generally , any employee may participate as away to invest for retirement . A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan benefits more than just your employeesIt benefits your organization . Help reward and retain loyal employees while attractingnew , well-qualified ones . Maintain a positive work environment and enhance yourreputation as a progressive , caring organization , with littlecost to you . It benefits you in your goal to prepare for yourown retirement . You will have a high-quality plan to build a supplementaryretirement income while saving on taxes today . You have the ability to choose from a wide variety ofinvestment options to fit your goals . How does a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan work ? Contributions - You and your employees can contribute money on a pre-taxbasis . This means you can afford to contribute more than ifyou put money aside after taxes were deducted . And , unlike ataxable investment , earnings on the account compound taxfree until the money is withdrawn . Then both contributionsand earnings will be treated as taxable income . A pre-taxcontribution of up to $ 17,500 may be made in 2013 . Forthose 50 and older , a catch-up contribution of $ 5,500 maybe made . Additional catch-up contributions may be madeby those with at least 15 years of service with a qualifiedemployer . These limits may increase in future years.You may be able to contribute to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan as well , and double your contributions . For example , in2013 , the maximum contribution to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan is normally $ 17,500 . That can be combined with the403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan normal contribution limit of $ 17,500 for a totalof $ 35,000 invested tax deferred . Catch-up contributions canincrease this combined limit even more . Employer match You may choose to have a plan available for just youremployees to easily contribute money for their retirement.Or , you can go a step further and offer additionalcontributions where you match all or a part of employeecontributions . The plan does not require an employer match , but its a great way to encourage participation and is apowerful tool in attracting and retaining employees . If youchoose to make matching contributions , they do not counttoward the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan limits on employee contributions . Roth option - You may choose to offer a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- option . Under aRoth option , employee contributions are made on an aftertax basis . However , a distribution from a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSAaccount is completely free of federal income tax if it meetsboth of the following requirements : It is made after the end of the five year period that beginswith the year that the employee made his or her first Roth403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSA contribution to your plan . It is made after the employee reaches age 59 , becomesdisabled or dies . Access to account balances-You can select a time period for employees to become fullyvested in the employer-matching portion of the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan.Note that employee contributions are always 100 % vested.Distributions can be made only when participants severemployment , reach age 59 , become permanently disabledor experience financial hardship , or are a reservist called toactive duty for 180 days or more or for an indefinite period.The employer plan may impose additional restrictions . Unless the distributions are rolled over to an eligibleretirement plan , they will be taxed as ordinary income.Distributions before age 59 may also be subject to an IRS10 % penalty tax . Distributions attributable to employercontributions are only allowed on severance of employmentor occurrence of another event as provided by the plan .
403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans were once referred to as tax-sheltered annuities , but 403 -LRB- b -RRB- s expanded beyond annuity products into other investments decades ago . A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan is a retirement savings plan for public schools and certain 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- nonprofit organizations. , hospital coops and self-employed ministers .
A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan is a tax-advantaged retirement savings plan under Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 for public education organizations , some 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- organizations -RRB- , cooperative hospitals , and self-employed ministers . Employee salary deferrals into a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan are made pretax and they grow tax-deferred with distributions taxable when withdrawn from the plan . 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans were also called tax-sheltered annuity .
An annuity , like a life insurance policy , is a contract . Additionally only life insurance companies can issue annuities . This sometimes becomes a confusing issue . Many people invest in annuities at their local bank . It is important to understand that the person in the bank is acting as an agent for the insurance company . The bank itself is not a party to the contract , only yourself and the insurance company . It 's critical that you not be under the impression that the bank is providing any financial security to your investment , they are not . There is also sometimes confusion with 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans are retirement savings vehicles available to many teachers , hospital workers and certain government agencies . When they were first developed the funding vehicle had to be an annuity , and they took on the moniker of TSA -LRB- Tax Sheltered Annuity -RRB- . Today a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- may use a variety of investment vehicles , usually mutual funds or managed money accounts . However many people still use the words TSA , annuity and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- interchangeably . This is technically incorrect and causes a lot of confusion with investors .
403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans were also called tax-sheltered annuity back in the day . A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan is a tax-advantaged retirement savings plan under Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 for public education organizations , some 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- organizations -RRB- , cooperative hospitals , and self-employed ministers . Employee salary deferrals into a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan are made pretax and they grow tax-deferred with distributions taxable when withdrawn from the plan .
403 -LRB- b -RRB- is a section in the Internal Revenue Code that allows certain occupations to defer income for the purpose of retirement . An annuity is not the sole funding mechanism for a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- . Annuities are probably the most popular vehicle . If your employer can offer a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- they will provide information about their program . Basically taxes are deferred during the accumulation phase and the payout in retirement is taxed as ordinary income .
The Roth IRA provides an ideal solution to many peoples retirement planning needs . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but taxation on the earnings is deferred and then forgiven upon reaching the age of 50 and a half . The plan must have been in effect for five years . These tax free dollars give the retiree tremendous leverage and flexibility . The Roth IRA is an essential part of many peoples plans . There are income restrictions that disqualify individuals and married couples filing jointly from establishing a retirement program using a Roth IRA . There is a phased out eligibility for Singles or heads of households earning between $ 60-70 ,000 annually or married couples filing jointly of $ 96,000-116 ,000 . and there are other restrictions . If a person is facing these restrictions and can not contribute to a Roth IRA there are several steps that can be taken . The first is to contact the plan administrator at their place of employment . It is a fairly simple matter to add a Roth option to existing 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . These Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans have all the benefit of a Roth IRA and the limits for participation are much higher making them ideal , particularly for highly compensated employees . The key is to determine if the persons future income tax rate will exceed the rate that is currently being charged . Many are surprised to find that when they stop paying on a mortgage and other deductible expenses that their income in retirement can be in a higher tax bracket than their current bracket . If there is not an option for a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan an alternative would be permanent life insurance . It is taxed in a similar way to the Roth IRA . The deposits are made with after tax dollars and the distribution can be free of income tax with some careful planning . The life insurance has the additional benefit of being self-completing should death interrupt the accumulation phase . Permanent life insurance comes in several styles which will match the investment options normally available to those who are interested in a Roth IRA . For the more conservative there is the totally guaranteed funding available in whole life insurance . The insurance company assumes all of the risk and steady growth is guaranteed . For the more adventuresome there are life policies in which the cash value is invested in a separate fund . This is normally administered by the insurance company but may have a better yield that the funds held in the companys general fund . There is another form where the detached cash value earns interest based upon one of several popular market indexes . These indexed universal life policies allow you to experience some of the gains of the market while often limiting the downside of the market . For those who want to experience the fluctuations and opportunities of the market there are variable life policies where the cash value is fully invested at the discretion of the policyholder . These policies have greater risk and potential rewards .
Yes , Teachers can have a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- if their place of employment is a for profit school . Most Teachers have a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- available to them for retirement planning . 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- are sections in the IRS code which define what retirement plans are available for different groups . I would recommend looking up the code and/or talking to your HR administrator for more information . If they are not available , please contact your agent or broker who can help answer any specific questions you have .
Tax sheltered annuities -LRB- TSA 's -RRB- are a type of retirement plan that allows employees of eligible public educational organizations or tax exempt organizations to contribute part of their pre-taxed salary to the plan with tax deferred growth . Employers are also allowed to contribute to a tax sheltered annuity for the employee . Authorized by IRS Section 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , TSA 's are also called 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
The Internal Revenue Code allows an employer to establish a defined contribution pension plan under paragraph 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Certain non-profit organizations can provide their employees access to a retirement savings plan under paragraph 403 -LRB- b. -RRB- The 403 -LRB- b -RRB- is usually in addition to the pension plan established by the school district or hospital concerned .
A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- retirement plan used to be called tax sheltered annuities , but with the addition of mutual funds , has kept its section of the code title . Self-employed ministers , public school and certain non-profit employees of 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- are generally the plan participants of a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- which has similar tax treatment of a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- .
There are two types of tax deferred retirement plans : qualified and non-qualified . Qualified plans that can accumulate tax deferred like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- s , 412 -LRB- e -RRB- s are under ERISA , The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . Non-qualified retirement plans that use life insurance and annuities accumulate tax deferred as well .
A qualified retirement plan can be a defined benefit plan or defined contribution plan . The private business sector and individuals generally choose defined contribution plans like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- s , Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs . Many of these plans fall under the regulatory legislation called The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 -LRB- ERISA . -RRB-
The service addresses both ERISA qualified plans and other nonqualified supplemental retirement plans . Assuming this question is addressing ERISA qualified plans , there are several retirement plans such as the popular 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- and 412 -LRB- i -RRB- as well as others such as cash balance plans defined benefit plans , defined contribution plans , profit sharing plans .
Qualified plans are a sanctioned government retirement plan with tax deductible contributions , tax deferred accumulation and taxable distribution including basis . An example of this would be the ERISA -LRB- The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . -RRB- Some plans allow employers to match employee contributions . There are several qualified plans available for individuals as well as employer sponsored like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- s , 412 -LRB- e -RRB- , SEP IRAs , IRAs , etc. .
The IRS has sanctioned many types of retirement plans under the Internal Revenue Code . Those plans are given special tax treatment through the contributions made to those plans . There are many qualified plans that allow contribution tax deductions for plan participants . Plans such as 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- s , 412 -LRB- e -RRB- , SEPs and IRAs .
A qualified retirement plan is a government sanctioned plan that generally allows tax deductible contributions like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- s , 412 -LRB- e -RRB- s , SEPa , IRAs , etc. . There are also qualified defined benefit plans sponsored by employers.These plans accumulate tax deferred and are taxable at distributions .
You should contribute to the maximum allowable in your retirement plan . It 's like paying yourself first . Some individual plans allow $ 5500 to $ 51000 for 2013 . Some employer sponsored plans like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 457 -LRB- b -RRB- permit $ 17500 in annual contributions . Keep in mind that some employers match some portion of your contributions .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Best Life Insurance Policy To Buy ?
The absolute best life insurance policy to buy is the one with the highest face amount at the lowest premium on the day you die . Unfortunately , none of us know what daythat will be . Therefore , contact a trusted life insurance broker to help you find the best product at the best price for YOUR unique situation .
Tough question , because , believe it or not , life insurance is used for a variety of reasons . There are a variety of types and features of insurance policies because everyone 's situation is different . Consider this analogy . If you walk into a local Home Depot and ask the clerk up front what the best tool to buy is , he wo n't be able to give you a specific answer until he asks you a few more questions , like `` What are you trying to build/fix ? '' `` How big is the project ? '' `` What is your desired price range ? '' Life insurance is the same . Before we can direct you down which aisle to look or what tool to grab , we need to know what you are trying to accomplish . So finding a trusted professional in your local area is like finding that very helpful , knowledgeable clerk in the store who will help you confidently make your purchase !
There is no one best life insurance for everyone . Different products are created for different needs , and different companies design products for different types of clients . Even different financial professionals have different impressions about what type of life insurance to get , based on how they see it plugging into your overall portfolio . It sounds confusing , but when you have a conversation with a life insurance agent who is watching out for your best interests , what you need becomes clear . Sometimes your best policy is determined by the limited choices you may have due to your age or health . Sometimes your budget steers you to your best life insurance . This may sound like a vague answer , but that is only because life insurance is designed for different niches . Until I know your need , I can not know how to answer correctly . But once I do know that , you may find choices and prices you never thought possible .
That is a great question , but a really hard one to answer . Without knowing what your specific goals for the policy are , -LRB- income replacement , cash value growth , debt coverage , a legacy to leave behind , or simply covering funeral expenses -RRB- it 's really difficult to give you a specific answer . I 'd tell you this - if you are looking for a policy that will cover your funeral expenses , leave something behind , or to draw money from , look for a whole life policy . If you are looking for short term coverage , say to cover college debt , buy a term life policy . If money is tight , and you are looking to cover expenses and hopefully leave some behind , get a mix of whole and term life policies , to fit your needs and budget . A good agent will walk you through this . If you need help , drop me a line , ok ? Thanks for asking !
What is the best life insurance policy to buy ? The one that fits your needs the best . The best policy is the one that works in your budget so you will continue to make payments and keep the policy in force . The problem for most people buying insurance is the storm of people telling them they 've made the wrong choice . The best policy for you is the one you keep in force and is there when you need it .
The best life insurance policy to buy is the one that best serves the needs you want to have met in the event you passed away . It could be all term insurance , all permanent insurance , or a combination of the two . For example , if you have a mortgage you want paid off , you may want to purchase a term insurance policy with a face amount large enough to cover the remaining balance and long enough to cover it til it 's scheduled to be paid off . So if there 's 18 years left on the mortage , you would want to look at a 20-year term policy . If you 're buying insurance for estate planning purposes , you may want to consider permanent insurance to pay a claim at any point in time regardless of when death occurs . Many people often need a mix of the two . I would recommend consulting with an independent life insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level and help you determine what coverage is appropriate and suitable for your needs and budget and get it placed in force - there 's no cost to using an independent agent -LRB- they do not charge fees for their services -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and life insurance needs analysis , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are a variety of life insurance policies that can fulfill indemnification , income and inheritance planning scenarios , but client suitability is the first order of business to establish the product fit for the consumer . You need to establish your personal profile , risk tolerance and economic goals . If your goals are to indemnify you beneficiaries from financial loss , is that exposure temporary or permanent . If your goal is tax advantaged retirement income , is your time line at least 15 years long ? If you define yourself on the basis of risk and reward , then the varying crediting methods need to match your risk tolerance : Par whole life and current assumption universal life use interest rates . Indexed universal life use both domestic and foreign indices . Variable universal life uses separate sub accounts with access to equities and bond instruments .
Life insurance is all about mathematics . With hundreds of years experience and millions of lives the companies know pretty well how many people are going to die out of a certain age group within a 12 month period of time . This is the basis for all life insurance and every policy is an adjustment of this information . The fundamental thing that is being adjusted is the length of coverage and the guarantee that the premium will remain level .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
You should talk with an independent life insurance agent so they can review options from multiple carriers with you , help identify the risk class you 're looking at with various carriers -LRB- a critical part when looking for coverage -RRB- , and identify the policy structure that will best serve your needs and your budget . It 's also highly , highly recommended that you do NOT apply to a bunch of carriers at the same time just to see what sticks - this can be a red flag to many carriers and they 'll want to know what your plans are with each policy , total amount of coverage you plan on keeping , as well as the underwriting results from them . There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for . This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you .
The best time to buy life insurance is the day before you die . That way you wo n't pay a penny more than you have to for your coverage ! What 's that you say ? You do n't know the day you are going to die ? Hmmm ... well then , the answer is easy : The best time to buy life insurance is now . Assuming you have a need -LRB- or a desire -RRB- for life insurance coverage , you are best served buying it sooner rather than later . Term life insurance rates are as inexpensive as they will ever be , and they will only get more expensive as you grow older . If you are interested in cash value insurance , it 's even more important that you buy it sooner rather than later . Find yourself a qualified agent and work with him or her to design a program of life insurance coverage that will address your needs and keep your overall costs down .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy is the one that is going to do what you want it to for what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Pay for any damage to your home ? The Best policy would guaranty your home would be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by any cause . All policies will have exclusions or limitations . The Best policy will have the fewest exclusions or limitations . Reimburse you for loss or damage to your personal property ? The Best policy will repair or replace -LRB- new for old -RRB- your property should it be damaged from any cause . Again , most policies will have exclusions and limitations , the Best policy will have the fewest exclusions and limitations . The Best policy will include a Personal Liability limit not less than $ 300,000 and offer a good Personal Umbrella should you need or want higher limits . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur and help you return to your pre-loss position . In my opinion , the Best policy will be the one that will do all the above for the most favorable premium .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
The first step in buying life insurance is to determine how much coverage you need , what type of insurance will work best for your needs , and how much it will cost . With life insurance you can not just pick out the policy with the features that you like . You must qualify medically , and your overall mortality risk -LRB- or lack thereof -RRB- determines your rate . What company you use and the type of policy you choose also figure into the premium you will pay . So the best way to buy life insurance is to talk to an agent who can help you determine how much you need , explain what types of policies work best for that need , and then shop around to find the best rate for which you qualify . Good life insurance agencies stick with you and guide you through to the time when the policy you want is in your safe , ready to go into action if tragedy strikes . While a life insurance agent is the last person most people wish to consult , in the end , most policies require an agent as the middle person , anyway . Starting out by calling an honest agent can make the process very simple and help you save hundreds of dollars .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
I am working on a case right now in which my client has applied for 11 policies . Here is the breakdown : He is a partner in one business with two other fellows . They have just completed a buy-sell agreement and are funding the agreement with life insurance . Per the advice of their accountant and their attorney , they are purchasing several policies to cover both the current and the anticipated future value of the business . One policy will be owned by the business , and four other policies will be owned by a trust . That gives us five policies so far . My client is also a partner in a second business , with another fellow . They are following the same funding strategy . That business will own one policy , and the trust will own an additional four . Our count is now up to 10 policies . But these policies take care only of business needs . My client is also married with children . He needs life insurance for family protection . So he is purchasing yet another policy for their benefit . That gives us 11 . The underwriter is fine with this set up . My client can justify the need for all policies financially . All policies have been deemed appropriate with regard to the financial needs of the business and the financial needs of his family . And you know what ? He could buy more if he wanted to . Lets suppose he supported a number of charities . They could be religious , or social service , or political . He could take out a separate policy for each of their benefit . Five charities , five more policies . But we have another consideration . What if his net worth is over $ 5 million , and he wants to preserve his estate for his heirs ? What if he wants to avoid forcing his family to liquidate his assets just to pay Uncle Sams estate tax bill ? He could buy life insurance to cover the tax bill . Another policy . We are not done yet :-RRB- . What if his parents were financially dependent on him . It happens . What if his premature demise would put them in financial straits ? He could buy life insurance on himself for their benefit , so they could be well taken care of . Do you realize that in this scenario , this one client could take out 20 or so policies ? And it would all be financially justified and appropriate . How do you like that ? Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
There are different schools of thought on how long you need life insurance . Some believe that you only need life insurance until you save up enough so that your dependents would do OK , even if your died prematurely . That philosophy is often called , `` buy Term , invest the rest . '' Those who like this idea tend to buy shorter terms and pay as little as possible for their life insurance , with the hopes that by the time their Term policy ends , they will not need to buy more . Some choose the age of retirement as their cutoff point for owning life insurance , with the intention of having all debts paid off and money for retirement saved up by then . On the opposite side of the fence are those who would use life insurance for a lot of their supplemental income and security in later life , and thus only buy permanent policies . Not only do they spend more on premiums than those who buy Term only , but they may even increase their premiums so that their policies are paid up by the time they retire . Many people fall somewhere in between . They buy what is most cost effective for each particular need . E.g. . They may buy Term for the bigger expenses in their lives , such as getting their kids raised . And they might buy a smaller Whole or Universal Life policy for their final expense needs . Then try to diversify their investments as is prudent at each stage of their lives , and in accordance with the economy , and products offered at that time .
Yes , more than likely you can , just like you can buy many insurance products on line . There are certainly arguments to be made for buying insurance that way and many major companies are including a `` direct line '' purchase option along with the more traditional distribution of products through a local licensed agency force . I know I myself am a licensed Professional Insurance adviser so I am biased , but it seems to me that we need to focus on what exactly we are buying when we make an insurance purchase . Sure , a policy is a document and a price is charged for what it represents , but i am convinced that most of us buy these things expecting that we 'll never have to use them , Hence the natural inclination to buy the cheapest . My opinion is that there are reasons to start your search on line , but talk to your local Insurance Professional for sound advice before buying anything .
Where is the best place to buy life insurance ? In Washington state it would be my office of course ! ;-RRB- Actually the best place to buy life insurance can vary . It could be online , on the phone or at an office . What you 're looking for is a agent who can answer your questions in such a way that you understand it . The agents role is not to speak to you in such a way that you are left scratching your head later over what was said . Big words , fancy charts do not make a good agent . A good agent translates the information you want into a way you understand , a poor one speaks over your head and bluffs their way through . I knew of an agent who used to produce a boiler plate document that was about two pounds of paper , of which two pages were actually about the client . The rest was fluff . He made a lot of sales that way because the clients were impressed by the volume presented , not the quality of information . The best place to buy is the place that actually answers your questions in a way that you understand and reduces the background noise as best as possible .
Where to buy life insurance if purchased properly should be a guided purchase . Just to buy a policy usually winds up being a mistake in the future or at least when you run into an agent wanting to sell a policy then it becomes like the used car problem . Yours is wrong ! Persons who just buy life insurance in today 's life without any kind of knowledge or counseling is kind of following the idea that they know it all and need no knowledgeable assistance . The best solution to purchasing life insurance is to find a knowledgeable agent who can , through in depth research of your total financial needs , guide you and tell you the why 's of certain policies . There is no one policy that is better than all others for everyone . If you have an insurance agent that is really interested in you and your situation that individual will spend time with you without pushing for a quick sale . The real desire of that agent must be to be a mutually beneficial part of your life and the agent . The agent will educate you on the possibilities and the reason for different types of policies . Then , with your help , find something that will fit into your financial plan . You should have a total financial plan that you are working toward , consisting of a proper budget , proper life insurance , -LRB- and other insurance -RRB- , proper investments and investments that are balanced for long range safety and fit your own desires . Buying life insurance properly is far more complicated than buying a policy . Many just buy a policy and then blame someone else for the failure of that policy to do the job it was purchased for . Allen D. Mitchell , Ph.D. , CLU , FLMI Author , second edition `` The Prophets Dollar ''
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Car Insurance Give You Credit ?
Having automobile coverage does not help your credit score . It does n't hurt your credit score either unless you fail to pay a past due balance as requested by your company and then it probably would be reported to the credit bureau when the balance goes into collection .
If you mean does it help your credit rating then I would say no . It does show financial responsibility and any one who drives needs to carry car insurance or a financial responsibility bond , even if you do not own a car . This is a protection for you in the event you are in a law suite and also for the other person who may be injured as well as anyone riding with you .
I am assuming that this question is asking if having automobile insurance helps a persons credit score . Based on my education and my experience so far in the industry , I would say no it does help build your credit score . To the best of my knowledge insurance carriers do not directly provide any financial information to the credit agencies .
Insurers typically use insurance scores not credit scores , but they are in-bedded with some of the same information . For most insurers this is one way of measuring your responsibility . Responsibility is a key ingredient in knowing if you understand what risks you are taking . Let me give you an example . Suppose you want to hand the keys of a new Ferrari over to a 16 year old . An insurer is going to look at that and say . . wait a minute , does that driver know how to drive such a powerful and expensive car . Will he or she give someone else the keys and let them drive . will he or she be using the car for delivery of Pizzas . All of those things might require a specific answer . Yet insurance scores give an insurer information on how you have acted in variety of situations and credit is part of that shorthand that conveys to an insurer that you are or are not a generally responsible person . The most accurate measure of how you will drive is how often you will drive . So be sure to add that element to your discussion with an agent . He or she may have polices from insurers who give discounts to those who use a vehicle say less than 4.000 mile s a year . Talk to your agent and give him or her enough information to be able to accurately present you and your exposures to many companies .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Credit is a rating factor in 48 of the 50 states . Only California and Virginia do not use credit score as a rating factor . In credit states you may get by without giving your social security number but you will also end up with the highest rate . If you ca n't buy a cell phone without giving your SS # why would you not give your SS # on your auto insurance ?
Expensive is a different definition for everyone ! Credit plays a huge part in homeowners insurance in many states . So if you have a great credit score your insurance will be much lower than if you have bad credit . Here is my best advice . If you are looking for a home get an agent to give you a quote on the average range of home value you are considering . It will give you a ballpark . Bottom line of you can not qualify for the loan due to the monthly insurance premium then you need to lower the value of the home you are considering or do n't buy .
Credit reports and scores are commonly used by auto insurance companies when underwriting and pricing the policy premiums . Credit scores have been shown to be highly correlated with future auto insurance claims . However , auto insurance companies do not report premium payment or claims information to the credit bureaus . So there is no direct impact of car insurance on your credit worthiness . However there may be an indirect impact on your credit if you suffer an auto accident while uninsured , or under insured . You may suffer from a loss of income if disabled . There may be extra medical bills , car repair expenses , and other liabilities . Any of these situations could make it difficult to make timely payments on any existing loans or debts . Late payments will certainly hurt your credit .
When you get married your car insurance should be less unless your spouse has a bad driving record or poor credit . Credit is a major factor for car insurance and when you get married some companies will average your credit scores and some will take the highest credit score . Make sure you ask about a multi-car discount as well .
Some insurance carriers may use a credit score for rating purposes . Most of the insurance carriers in my state -LRB- New York -RRB- use a ` credit profile ' which means they access one of the big three credit bureaus and select specific items . What they select , how they interpret the data , and how it affects your premiums is not available for your scrutiny . In NY , credit profile is mostly used for new business quoting purposes for home and auto insurance . Carriers in NY load in a whole bunch of rating info when determining your premium - gender , age , marital status , own or rent your home , driving extract , # of years licensed , prior claims on home and/or auto policies , is your prior carrier preferred , standard , or substandard , distance driven to work , pleasuire or business use , and a lot more . Keep your ` credit profile ' and score as clean as possible . Most banks and credit unions have credit specialists who can advise you for free on how to do this . For example , pay all bills ahead of time if possible and always pay more than the minimum amounts . Do n't have credit lines totaling more than a certain % of your gross annual income , etc. . Credit profile is a major influence when getting insurance quotes . I know of no ` proof ' credit profile is a determinate of loss potential , but using credit profile for insurance rating is the way of the world .
Yes it can . Credit is a factor with many companies . Insurance companies give an insurance score . It is different than a credit score . A variety of factors including credit are considered . Some companies still don ; t do credit , but usually you will pay a higher rate . The insurance company reasoning is that , by their statistics and experience , a person with bad credit statistically is a higher risk . I know that is not always the case but unfortunately , agree or not -LRB- and I do n't like it either -RRB- that is the facts .
Yes you can . Having a tough credit history may mean that you pay more for the coverage than say your neighbor who has very good credit . Credit really only effects the base pricing when a car insurance policy is being rated . This is very much unlike a bad driving record or accident history that can directly effect not only pricing but availability of standard issue car policies . As has been said before , keep in mind that credit is only one of many factors that can have an effect on what you pay for your car insurance protection . Talk to your Insurance Professional about any available discounts .
That is an excellent question ! The getting of quotes has no effect upon your credit score at all . In the process of getting a quote , there is nooffer of credit like there is in applying for a loan or credit card . All you are asking for is an estimate of the cost , just like you would at a mechanic before you would have work done . -LRB- When you apply for a credit card , you are asking them to give you access to money that you do n't have , so that offer or attempt will show up on your credit report . -RRB- It is in your best interest to get a few quotes , so ask away . Thanks for asking !
Lets say you have a hundred friends and each has an automobile . If they could agree that they wanted to have enough money to pay legal expenses that they might have if they are responsible for an accident , you could form an insurance company . If you were able to determine -LRB- from actuarial studies -RRB- the amount of money you could anticipate spending in helping each other out in the coming year and the amount was $ 50,000 you would then know the basic share for each friend , $ 500 -LRB- $ 50,000 / 100 -RRB- Someone in your group will probably object because they only take their car to shows once or twice a year and certainly dont have the exposure the rest of the friends have . Another will object because they live on a farm and rarely drive into town -LRB- although it might be a long ways . -RRB- They will contend that their exposure is less than the other friends . Another friend will complain because one of the friends has a street-legal racing car and it is more likely that it will be involved in an accident . One of your friends has a drinking problem and no one really wants a share of his legal liability . And so it goes . What at one time seemed simple and logical becomes increasingly complex . Actuaries are a rare group of people who compile data and have the ability to slice that data in many different ways to determine the effects of the location where the car is garaged , average annual miles , credit risk of the owner , make , model and year of the vehicle . In fact , these actuaries can compute over 100 rating areas for an automobile . The point that this exercise makes is to distribute the risk that all of us face equitably . I have been asked if a red car costs more to insure than others . I am sure that a study somewhere has shown that red cars have a slightly higher than average accident rate . It is something that could be used in the rating process . I have been asked if a previously totaled car , now registered legally can be insured based upon that same concern for a fair premium . So actuaries give the insurance company many alternatives upon which they can design a rating scheme for an automobile . In my state the scheme is set by state law . Actually the California Constitution dictates how automobile policies will be rated . So legislative action can have a profound effect on automobile rating . Most states give authority to their insurance commissioner to regulate automobile insurance rates . Their charge is not so much to maintain fairness as it is to make sure that the companies take in enough premiums to pay the claims that are anticipated . In other words , the commissioner does everything in his or her power to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . Insurance companies keep very close tabs on the claims that they pay and the premiums that they take in . Actually the actuaries get involved in this as well , to determine if they are charging enough for every different type of coverage . When the company fails to receive enough premiums to pay all of the claims in a given year , they approach the commissioner and propose a rate increase . At this point the company has done everything possible to spread the risk appropriately , however , there are some areas that they want to adjust to make sure that the company is being fair and that the company can continue to keep its promises . That is how a company computes what it will charge you for your car .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
The health insurance premium tax credit is a creation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and first became available January 1 , 2014 . In general , individuals and families whose income falls between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level will qualify for some level of subsidy for health insurance that they purchase through the Federal or state health insurance marketplaces in the person 's state of residence . The amount of premium credit a person qualifies for is based upon a sliding scale that is highest at the low end of the Federal Poverty Level and declines to almost nothing as a person gets to the 400 % level . A person can only receive this premium tax credit for health insurance plans they purchase through the government health insurance marketplace . You do have a choice when you learn that you qualify for a premium tax credit . You can choose to receive it in the form of an `` Advanced Premium Tax Credit '' or you can wait until you do your annual taxes and capture it at that time . With the `` Advanced Premium Tax Credit '' choice your credit amount will be sent to the insurance carrier you select each month to pay a portion of your monthly premium and you will be balance billed for the rest . If you opt to pay for your health insurance in full and then claim your credit on your income taxes the amount of the credit you qualified for would be included in any income tax refund you receive . This might be a very important choice . Your premium subsidy will be based upon what you estimate your income will be in the coming year . If you guess wrong and receive a higher subsidy than it turns out you actually qualified for based on the income you report on your income tax form for that year then the overpayment can be withheld from any income tax refund you might have had coming . Conversely , if you made less than you had projected you would find your possible income tax refund increased by the remaining subsidy amount you would have qualified for . While the premium tax subsidies do provide a mechanism to assist persons in certain income levels to purchase health insurance they might not have otherwise been able to afford , it will also complicate the income tax filing process for many of these people .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can Health Insurance Deny For Pre Existing Conditions ?
The timing of this question is very interesting . The open enrollment period for policies covered under the Affordable Care Act closes today - March 31 , 2014 . Beginning tomorrow , April 1 of 2014 , anyone with a preexisting health condition must wait until the next open enrollment period to enroll in a plan . Coverage would begin on January 1 , 2015 .
Health insurance , if purchased through and Exchange -LRB- An experienced broker will help you enroll -RRB- will not require any medical questions to be answered and all pre-existing conditions will be covered . You may also be eligible for an Obamacare federal tax subsidy . However , many off-Exchange plans , such as short-term coverage , do not cover pre-existing conditions and medical questions will be asked .
No and yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- anyone applying for major medical health insurance coverage after January 1 , 2014 can not be denied coverage for a pre-existing health condition . Insurance coverage is guaranteed to be issued and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately . However , this does require that you enroll for individual health insurance coverage during the mandated open enrollment period which for 2014 ended on March 31st . If you failed to enroll during the open enrollment period then you can not apply for major medical insurance coverage until the next open enrollment period which begins on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . The only exceptions to this part of the law are for what are referred to as `` Change of Life Status Events '' such as marriage , divorce , losing other health insurance coverage , or having or adopting a child -LRB- as the most common examples -RRB- . For the remainder of 2014 the only options available to persons who failed to enroll during the open enrollment period would be Short Term Medical insurance or perhaps a limited benefit/indemnity policy . However , these policies do still have some underwriting question associated with them that could result in your being declined for coverage . Also , these types of health plans do not cover pre-existing health conditions and do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for being major medical coverage . Therefore , you would be subject to the individual mandate tax penalty even if you do take out one of these types of policies .
When you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older you will be in your initial Medicare Open Enrollment Period to purchase a Medicare Supplement . You have six month from when your Part B takes effect to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately with no waiting period . You can purchase a Medicare Supplement anytime you want to outside of your initial Open Enrollment Period but once your Open Enrollment Period ends you will have to answer all health questions to qualify for a Medicare Supplement . If you have a serious health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium to get the pre-existing health condition covered .
As of January 1 , 2014 all major medical insurance plans , both individual and group , can no longer have any exclusions , limitations or waiting periods for pre-existing health conditions . So , from that perspective it is not a matter of which health insurance accepts pre-existing conditions . Any health insurance plan in compliance with the Affordable Care Act has to . Now , there are Short Term Major Medical policies and some limited benefit and/or indemnity type policies out there that can still apply underwriting and can limit or exclude pre-existing conditions but these are not major medical health insurance plans that meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . In some instances people are marketing these types of products as a low cost alternative to ACA compliant health insurance plans . They provide you with some degree of financial protection but they will not shield you from the Individual Mandate tax penalty or provide you with comprehensive coverage . If you are offered a policy that does not cover pre-existing conditions that is a red flag that someone is trying to sell you a non-compliant policy - BUYER BEWARE .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
You can disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to Original Medicare from January 1 thru February 14 of each year . You will need to get a Medicare Supplement and Prescription Drug Plan . If you have serious health conditions you may not be qualify for a Medicare Supplement . Depending on the pre-existing condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium because of the pre-existing condition . It would be very important to talk with a qualified agent before you make your decision to disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan .
Any true major medical insurance policy , group or individual , should cover treatment for Lupus as it is an autoimmune disease in the same class as arthritis . Perhaps a person who was issued an individual health insurance policy that was grandfathered under the terms of the health care reform law was issued coverage excluding Lupus as a condition of issuing the coverage but that 's about the only context I can think of where this question could arise . Certainly in the era of health care reform , especially after January 1 , 2014 , coverage for conditions such as Lupus should not be a big point of discussion . No policy issued after that date can have pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . That being said , how treatment for conditions such as Lupus are handled from a level of coverage perspective can and do vary from one insurance carrier to the next . First of all , your perception of coverage may be affected by the type of policy you have enrolled in . If you enrolled in a policy with a $ 6000 deductible then your perception might be that your condition is n't being covered when actually it is but you are n't seeing any benefits until you 've met your deductible . In other cases your insurance carrier may have treatment protocols in place that guide your physician on the methods of treatment and types of medications that must be adhered to for treatment of such a condition and these may be a departure from your past experience and usage . If you are covered under a non-compliant health plan , possibly a limited benefit or indemnity type plan , then it is quite likely you would have little or no coverage for Lupus or be subject to pre-existing condition exclusions and/or waiting periods . Short Term Medical policies , which by nature do not cover pre-existing conditions , are also another possible area where a person could find that Lupus would not be covered . But , in today 's environment , a person suffering from Lupus can get major medical coverage that covers their condition .
Medicare Supplement plans can be changed anytime during the year . Just because you want to change your Medigap plan does not necessarily mean you can . When you are new to Medicare , after your Part B is activated , you have six months to enroll in any Medicare Supplement offered in your state with no health questions being asked , your acceptance is guaranteed . After your open enrollment periods ends you can apply for a Medicare Supplement later at any time but you must answer all of the health questions . If you have a serious pre-existing health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a substantially higher premium in order to get the pre-existing condition covered .
That is a great question ! One of the great things that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- did for us was remove the pre-existing condition exclusion . Health insurance companies can no longer deny you coverage because of your pre-existing condition , nor can they cap your life time expenses . When you go to enroll , head to the Healthcare marketplace , WEBSITELINK and see if you qualify for discounted insurance . A great many people do . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
It depends on the plan benefits . Effective 1/1/2014 private health insurance carriers can no longer deny applicants due to pre existing medical conditions , but that does n't mean the covered services fall under the benefit details . Make sure to verify your benefits before enrolling in a plan to make sure your pre existing condition -LRB- s -RRB- are covered appropriately .
Health insurance for pre-existing conditions is covered through the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- . When you purchase coverage through designated Open Enrollment periods , your pre-existing conditions are covered and you can not be denied for medical underwriting reasons . A licensed broker -LRB- preferably someone that has been in the business at least 20 years -RRB- can help you compare the best options and easily enroll .
Open Enrollment under Federal law when you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older , you have a guaranteed right to buy a Medicare Supplement policy for six months . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately . After your Open Enrollment period is over you can apply for a Medicare Supplement later at any time , but you may be charged a higher rate or be denied coverage if you have serious pre-existing health conditions . This may be your only chance to get a Medicare Supplement without having to go through medical underwriting .
Traditional Major Medical ? No ! Group medical ? No ! Short Term medical ? Yes ! Whether on or off-exchange , if you 're purchasing long term major medical health insurance -LSB- post 2014 -RSB- you can not be denied coverage due to pre existing medical conditions . However , many pre existing conditions will still be excluded from benefits , so make sure you are applying for a plan that suits your needs .
Unfortunately , the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may be denied coverage . If you are not in your initial Open Enrollment period or another Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Policy . Therefore , it 's best to get a Medigap Policy when you think you do n't need one . Often times people wait until a health condition arises because they think the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- will apply . With that said , each insurance company has unique health questions . One insurance company may deny rheumatoid arthritis while another is okay with it . In other words , do n't assume you will be denied . An independent agent can review your health history and let you know if you can apply for a Medigap policy .
Currently in most states you can be denied individual health insurance if your pre-existing conditions are severe or costly . As a result of Obamacare , most states do not have child only health insurance plans . In most cases you can not be denied employer group health insurance plan coverage . All this will change in 2014 when carriers can not deny you but expect premiums to be 2x current levels .
If you do have a pre-existing condition , it 's possible that that particular condition would be excluded . For example , if you have had several knee surgeries , it 's most likely that they 'd exclude your knee . Do n't forget that if you get denied for DI due to a pre-exisiting condition , you could still possibly receive critical illness insurance .
Private health insurance covers pre-existing conditions ... most of the time ! I 'll explain : When applying for coverage during Open Enrollment -LRB- assuming it is a qualified Exchange or Off-Exchange plan -RRB- , pre-existing conditions are covered and there will be no waiting period or surcharge applied . As an experienced health insurance broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , this issue is often discussed with customers and on our top-ranked websites . However , non-compliant plans , such as short-term policies , do not cover pre-existing conditions . If you miss Open Enrollment , these temporary plans are popular options .
That depends entirely upon what the pre-existing condition is and it 's likelihood of causing a person to become disabled . Something like common allergies would technically be a pre-existing condition but just because you may need allergy shots it is highly unlikely that such a condition would be an issue . Now , if you 've had a mild stroke and have a family history of heart disease then you are in a situation where qualifying for disability insurance would be much more difficult , if not impossible , in the individual market . Some disability insurance carriers will issue coverage that might exclude coverage if the disability is a result of the pre-existing condition . And some employer groups offer group disability coverage to their employees that may be guaranteed to be issued as least up to certain levels of financial coverage .
This will all change very soon as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 -LRB- PPACA aka Obamacare -RRB- takes effect , but for now this very much depends on if you allow your health insurance coverage to lapse . If you do not lapse coverage and begin private coverage , then usually a pre-existing condition would be covered . If you allowed coverage to lapse and then bought private insurance , it is possible for the insurer to excluse the pre-existing condition . Once PPACA takes effect , pre-existing conditions will no longer be allowed for the most part .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Drug Test ?
Fully underwritten life insurance generally requires a para-med that include blood and urine testing . The analysis collects several data points and assessing the ranges : below normal , normal and above normal . During the discovery process nicotine and other drugs in the system can be detected . Those results are forwarded on to the insurance company for an underwriting decision .
If you are buying a life insurance policy that requires medical underwriting , it will test for certain illegal drugs , especially cocaine and marijuana . If you are purchasing a policy that not require an exam , no drug tests will be done . However , then the application will ask if you have taken illegal drugs withing a certain period of time .
MetLife offers life insurance that does drug test , and it also offers nonmed life insurance that does not drug test . The applications for both types of policies will ask if there has been illegal drug use in the past . One policy does a blood test and urine test , while the other just goes by what is on the application , which must be filled out honestly to prevent insurance fraud .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
Only policies that use medical underwriting will test you for drug use through a blood and/or urine test . Simplified issue policies do not order blood tests , but they usually do ask about drug use on your life insurance application . Guaranteed issue life insurance does not ask about drug use on your application , nor does it test for it . However , the minimum age for guaranteed issue life insurance is usually at least 40 years old . If the drug use that you are referring to is marijuana , that generally is not a problem , if you apply with the right companies . Using marijuana after a recent DUI or after treatment for addiction is problematic . And of course , using cocaine , meth or heroin makes it difficult to get all but the most lenient -LRB- and therefore , most expensive -RRB- of life insurance policies . Talk to a life insurance agency that you can trust to find out what type of policy is workable for you , at the lowest possible price . They are bound to privacy and no insurance company will see your name unless you actually apply for the policy .
Marijuana use is and has been prevalent in the United States for a very long time . It is the most widely used of all recreational drugs today , and is used by people of all walks of life . Its active chemical , commonly known as THC has been proven to help those with rheumatic diseases , ocular conditions or certain mental illnesses and is a known relaxant . Whatever your stance is on the use of illegal drugs , it is likely that at some time in your life you have encountered marijuana , and for many it remains a concern when applying for insurance . Does the use of Marijuana make me ineligible for life insurance ? If you use marijuana , you may be a little concerned about taking the required exam to get term life insurance fearing that if marijuana use is detected , you may be ineligible for coverage . Fear not . Marijuana use , by itself is not something that will make you ineligible , but it is something that is tested for . Of course , the results of the test may come back negative , but the questionnaire will probably also ask whether you have used any illegal drugs in the past five years . If the answer is yes , again , you should be able to qualify for life insurance . If marijuana shows up in your blood test , the chances that you will be able to qualify for the most desirable rating class are somewhat diminished , and if they show up not all at -LRB- but you answer yes to the question about marijuana use -RRB- your chances are diminished somewhat . Will I get a smokers rate if I use or have used marijuana ? Each life insurance company follows different guidelines , but generally , you will not be charged smokers rates for life insurance if you have used or are currently using marijuana . If my life insurance blood tests positive for marijuana use , will this information be reported to law enforcement or the government in any way ? No . By law , your medical records are protected . The report will go to the MIB , but you give your consent to this when you fill out the life insurance application . The MIB stands for Medical Information Bureau , and it is a non-governmental agency which provides services to health and life insurance companies across the U.S. . The information submitted to the MIB is not accessible to the government . Is there any way to get life insurance without taking a blood test ? Yes ! There is something called No-Exam life insurance which does not require an exam of any kind . Depending on the amount applied for and whether they require a blood test for that amount they will . The question about drugs is always on the application regardless of amount so if you were to answer honestly -LRB- suggested -RRB- they would know . In some cases you are simply rated as a smoker . Other companies may decline you . I suggest you work with a broker who knows what to look for in a company .
Yes , any life insurance company that requires a blood test , urine test , or oral swab in order to get a life insurance policy will test for the presence of illegal drugs and cotinine -LRB- an indicator of cigarette use -RRB- . This is called a medically underwritten policy . If using a No Exam policy , they do not require an exam and do not test for drugs , although they will usually ask about drug use on the application .
Some life insurance companies have been increasing their drug screening to the Drug 5 Panel/Drug 8 Panel in response to the increasing use of illegal drugs . The 5 panel drug test detects cocaine , PCP , marijuana , opiates , and meth/amphetamines . They also test for nicotine/cotinine and alcohol . No Exam policies do not conduct blood or urine tests .
Yes , all companies when using paramedical exams do some drug testing as part of the chemical analysis in the underwriting process . Some drugs will effect certain levels of function within say kidney function that will show up by pushing the level higher . Alcohol for example , a legal form of a `` drug '' if consumed too close to an exam will raise blood sugars , alter the kidney function numbers and a few other numbers like those involving the liver . That is why it is never a good idea to consume significant amounts of alcohol the night before a blood/urine test . It will skew the results . Then it is up to the individual to get a second test , at their expense to show the first test was off .
A drug test can be your best friend when you apply for life insurance . If you smoke pot on a casual basis , and have been prequalified for non-smoker rates , then a clean drug test on your insurance exam will prove you are true to your word . Let 's suppose you used cocaine in the last year under highly exceptional circumstances , and your broker was able to get you underwriting leniency from a carrier . Their offer would be contingent upon a clean drug test now . If you you still use drugs , then you should consider one of the simplified issue policies referenced above . The only problem is that the total amount of coverage for which you will qualify will be comparatively small . If you need more substantial coverage , then there is a small possibility an excess-market carrier will take you . These underwriting syndicates specialize in extreme risks .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
For their life insurance policies that have medical underwriting , Farm Bureau does drug test for life insurance . Farm Bureau also offers simplified issue life insurance that usually does not require any testing of bodily fluids . When no oral swabs , bleed tests or urine tests are done , there is no drug testing done . However , there are questions about drug use on the application .
If you are buying a New York Life Insurance policy that requires an exam , it will drug test . If you are buying a New York Life Insurance policy that does not require an exam , there will be no drug test performed . However , the application may ask if you took illegal drugs , depending on which policy you are applying for .
Yes , life insurance companies that require a paramed exam will drug test . If you purchase a nonmed policy that does not require an exam , no drug testing will be done . However , they usually ask about drug use on the application . The exception is fully guaranteed issue life insurance ; they do not ask any health or risk questions .
Guardian life will test for Nicotine and Cocaine . These are the two most common substance tests that almost all insurers test for when they perform medical underwriting . Besides these two substances , most carriers -LRB- Guardian included -RRB- , do not test for other substances , i.e. drugs . If there are other drugs that you currently use and you do not disclose , you do run the risk of creating a contested life insurance policy if you should die within the contestability period .
What tests are run for life insurance depends on the coverage applied for and vary somewhat by company . For smaller amounts there may just be a non-medical declaration and depending on whether or not anything is declared there may be no testing . If urine , and/or blood , is required , testing could include testing for bodily functions . The presence of raised levels of certain substances , such as sugar in urine , would trigger more tests . In addition , testing is done for nicotine and for traces of illegal drugs . X-rays , electrocardiograms or other tests could also be required . It is very important to be truthful when completing an application for insurance . If you have a medical condition you are concerned about , then experience and independence are important . I suggest working with a local agent/broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life Insurance companies must do a blood test for any amount over around $ 25,000 , although some groups allow up to $ 150,000 . The tests are to detect both legal and illegal drugs . If you are taking medications and do not disclose that , they will be found . This helps the carrier determine what your general state of health is . So assume that whatever the drug is you may be taking , it will be detected by the test . Even a week after you have taken that drug . Thank you . GARY LANE .
The carriers are testing for diseases , such as diabetes , and kidney problems . But they are also testing for drug use , but legal and illegal drug use . If someone is taking a prescription drug and does not disclose that , the carriers wants to know , because the prescription would normally be to help a non disclosed illness . They also want to know about illegal use . Thank you . GARY LANE .
I am presuming that you are asking about tests for illegal drug consumption and not just prescription medications in general . As far as health insurance goes this is a non-issue . An applicant for health insurance is not subjected to any physical exams or blood or urine tests as a condition for being offered health insurance coverage . While in the past there may have been questions regarding illegal drug usage on a health insurance application that if answered truthfully by a drug user could have resulted in their being declined for coverage in the individual health insurance market we have moved past that now . As the Affordable Care Act prohibits medical underwriting and requires policies to be guaranteed to be issued regardless of pre-existing conditions there are no such questions to be answered now . Ironically , in the individual health insurance marketplace the only drug that you can be asked about and perhaps penalized for in the form of higher premiums is for tobacco use . No questions are asked about marijuana , cocaine or other drugs . This is different from applying for life insurance where in many cases a physical exam that may include drawing blood and/or taking a urine sample are part of the underwriting process . With the expanded number of states that have approved marijuana for medical usage and the outright legalization that Colorado and Washington are now experimenting with the life insurance industry is having to adjust to this changing legal environment in their underwriting practices . Different life insurance carriers are addressing the marijuana usage issue in different ways so there is no universal standard being applied to this issue and it is an area where a great deal of evolution is currently underway and probably will be for years to come .
Life insurance companies use a urine test , blood test , physical measurements and possibly a resting EKG to evaluate your overall health and your risk of death . A urine test is most commonly used to test for drugs or alcohol , but may also be used to test for certain medical conditions . A larger death benefit may require additional testing .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Does Basic Renters Insurance Cover ?
A renters policy is essentially a homeowners policy that does not cover the structure . It has two basic coverages , Property Coverage which is designed to make you `` whole '' -LRB- within the definitions of the policy -RRB- should you have a `` covered loss '' and suffer economic loss in excess of the deductibleas a result . It also covers personal liability for bodily injury or property damage that the renter is liable for by law .
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
If you 're insured with a reputable company and a good agent , your renters policy should include theft . All a renters policy is is a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It 's there to cover your stuff and your liability . It 's rare , but there are companies that offer coverage that may not include theft . This coverage form is called `` Basic Form '' and it will not cover theft . Never , never , never accept a policy written on a basic form for your renters coverage . The most common form is Broad Form , and it will cover theft . Most companies and agents will use this when writing your renters policy . Do n't accept anything less .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Massachusetts does not require you to obtain `` Renters '' insurance as it does auto insurance but your landlord or just good judgment may suggest this coverage be considered . Renters or Tenant/homeowners coverage provides coverage in three principal areas ; Damage to your personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture and/or household items -RRB- , Additional expenses to live in temporary quarters should your apartment or building be damaged or destroyed by a fire , wind or other covered cause , Personal liability coverage should certain acts cause injury or damage to someone , possibly your neighbors or even the building you occupy . Anyone responsible for maintaining a household should at least consider securing this type of coverage . It beats digging into your savings after a storm or fire or waiting for the Red Cross to give you a shirt , a bed and a hot meal . The cost for a basic policy would be in the $ 150-200 per year range . It certainly would be considered as important as maintaining comprehensive and collision insurance on a used car . In fact , simply increasing your deductibles on your car insurance may reduce your premiums enough to permit you to secure a basic policy .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Renter 's Insurance is not required by state law , but many landlords will require that you carry renter 's insurance as part of your lease agreement . This is because Renter 's Insurance comes with liability insurance protection , so , in some cases , if you damage the premises , they can collect from your Renter 's Insurance policy . That coverage usually applies for accidentally created fires -LRB- for example -RRB- . Fortunately , most people can buy Renter 's insurance for about $ 10 - $ 12 per month -LRB- it might be less and some basic policies only cost about $ 5.00 / month -RRB- . Send me an email and I can get you a rate !
A renters policy is essentially a homeowners policy that does not cover the structure . It has two basic coverages , Property Coverage which is designed to make you `` whole '' -LRB- within the definitions of the policy -RRB- should you have a `` covered loss '' and suffer economic loss in excess of the deductibleas a result . It also covers personal liability for bodily injury or property damage that the renter is liable for by law .
There are 3 policy forms for property insurance . Basic , Broad and Special . Basic will cover , Fire , Lightning , Windstorm or Hail , Explosion , Smoke , Vandalism , Aircraft or Vehicle Collision , Riot or Civil Commotion , Sinkhole Collapse , Volcanic Activity . Broad will cover all of Basic plus falling objects , weight of ice , sleet or snow , and accidental water damage . Special will cover everything that is not specifically excluded . If the policy does not exclude the coverage you are covered . Common exclusion are government action , nuclear hazard , war and military action , flood , fungus and pollution . Special Form gives you the broadest coverage 's . Now with special form you have a choice of an HO3 or an HO5 An HO3 is named perils for personal property and HO5 is open perils minus exclusion for personal property . While HO3 is the most common policy purchased the HO5 is the broadest coverage you can get in a homeowners policy .
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
Primarily renter 's insurance is designed to protect your personal belongings that you have in your home that you rent . Renter 's insurance may replace items that are stolen from your home , or are damaged or destroyed by fire or flooding . You need to inquire with your insurance agent as to exactly what kinds of incidents are covered by any particular policy . For example in areas that are prone to hurricanes or tornadoes you may need to buy a rider in addition to the basic renter 's insurance , or you may need to buy hurricane insurance specifically .
A basic Renter-type policy should cost you about $ 150-200 per year . A basic policy would include a nominal amount of coverage on your personal property -LRB- $ 15,000 or so -RRB- , cover you for specific named perils such as fire , theft , wind , vandalism , etc. and provide coverage for the additional cost of living in temporary quarters should your building be damaged by an insured peril and become unfit for living . In addition , it would be common for this type of policy to provide a nominal -LRB- $ 100,000 -RRB- amount of personal liability coverage . Although not included in most basic policies , I 'd suggest `` Replacement Cost '' coverage be requested . Should your property be damaged , instead of paying you the depreciated value of the property , you could claim the full cost for its repair or replacement . Very important in a serious claim ! Of course , higher limits and additional coverages should be available for an additional charge .
No one will require you to maintain Renters Insurance other than a current or future landlord but certainly good judgment would suggest this type of coverage be considered . Typical Renters or Tenant/homeowners policies provide coverage in three principal areas ; They cover damage to your personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture and/or household items -RRB- , Additional living expenses you might incur while occupying temporary living quarters should your apartment or building be damaged or destroyed by a fire , wind or some other covered cause and Your Personal Liability should certain acts cause injury or damage to someone , possibly your neighbors or even the building you occupy . Anyone responsible for maintaining a household should at least consider securing this type of coverage . It beats digging into your savings after a storm or fire or waiting for the Red Cross to give you a shirt , a cot or a hot meal . The cost for a basic policy would be in the $ 150-200 per year range . This type of coverage should be considered as important as maintaining comprehensive and collision insurance on your car . In fact , simply increasing your deductibles on your car insurance may reduce your premiums enough to permit you to secure a basic policy .
No , root canals are covered under Dental Insurance Policies , and usually as a basic service . You would need to purchase a dental plan to cover that procedure . Most traditional dental plans cover it as a basic service , with an 80/20 coinsurance after the deductible . That 's where you pay the deductible first , then the plan pays 80 % of the bill , and you pay 20 % . But , before you just buy a dental plan , and go get the procedure , check to make sure what the waiting period for basic services is ... Many dental plans have a 6-12 month waiting period for those types of procedures .
It varies by UL policy and company , but here are a few basics . There are basically 2 parts to all ULs , but there may be more . The one I have has 3 parts . Part A is how much you pay into for just the life insurance coverage and part B is what goes into the accumulation account to make the policy grow money wise . A UL has flexible premiums meaning you can pay in as little or as much as you want within a specified amount within the contract guidelines . There is also the target amount which is what you probably should be paying in minimally . If you pay the minimum , it basically is a term policy that continues . If you decide you want the account to grow , you can put more money into to make the cash accumulation grow . I usually tell the clients I work with to think of it as a permanent life policy with a high yield bank savings account since most will offer you at worst a 3 % return for ever dollar you put into the accumulation section of the account . Do keep in mind that rates maybe be more or less depending on the policy and current interest rates that the insurance company uses . There are many other factors in these types of life policies , but that is the basics of it .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
It depends on many factors , but here are the main factors for price . 1 -RRB- What 's the policy type ? 2 -RRB- What 's the face amount ? 3 -RRB- What 's your gender ? 4 -RRB- What 's your age ? 5 -RRB- What 's your general health like ? 6 -RRB- Are you a tobacco user ? What you should look at are basically two main questions . What does the life insurance cover and how much do I need ? Cost is a factor for a policy , but it 's much more important to get the right policy with the riders you 'll need .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Skin Tag Removal ?
Skin tags are benign growths on the skin that can form anywhere but are most common on the eyelid , face , neck , armpit or groin . Removal is a relatively simple and painless outpatient procedure . In most cases skin tags do not pose a medical problem and removal is for cosmetic reasons . In some situations the tag may be in a place on the body where clothing rubs against it and it becomes quite unpleasant . In those situations it is possible your carrier will pay for removal of the skin tag .
Skin tags are benign growths on the skin that can form anywhere but are most common on the eyelid , face , neck , armpit or groin . Removal is a relatively simple and painless outpatient procedure . In most cases skin tags do not pose a medical problem and removal is for cosmetic reasons . In some situations the tag may be in a place on the body where clothing rubs against it and it becomes quite unpleasant . In those situations it is possible your carrier will pay for removal of the skin tag .
It will depend upon your medical situation ; 1 -RRB- No Scenario -LRB- the most likely -RRB- - the skin removal is for cosmetic purposes . This is generally understood to extend to persons who have meaningful weight loss that leaves them with excess skin . So , you may have done the right thing by losing a lot of weight but you may have to reconcile yourself to living longer with a flabbier body or privately pay for cosmetic surgery . 2 -RRB- Yes Scenario -LRB- uncommon but not rare -RRB- - where medically necessary criteria are met . There are circumstances where there can be recurring health problems caused by skin overhang -LRB- yeast infections , sores and rashes , infections , etc. -RRB- that can be remedied or mitigated by removing the overhanging skin , a Panniculectomy . This is not the same procedure as what is commonly referred to as a `` tummy tuck . '' The Punniculectomy only removes the overhanging skin and does not address the stretching of abdominal muscle that can also occur and which is commonly addressed in the `` tummy tuck '' procedure . As such , depending upon the terms of your policy and how a claim is coded I can foresee the situation where both procedures are performed -LRB- if the doctors went on and did the more invasive abdominal muscle procedures while `` they were in there '' and this was done with your prior consent or request -RRB- and part of the procedureis covered by the policy and the other part being deemed for cosmetic purposesand not being covered .
More often than not , surgical removal of a lipoma is not covered by health insurance . A lipoma is a benign soft tissue tumor that reside below the skin . They are usually soft to the touch and not painful . More often than not removal is done for cosmetic reasons . Health insurance policies cover treatment that is medically necessary . If the tumor is large and creating other medical issues -LRB- such as pressure on a nerve -RRB- or if tests reveal the tumor is liposarcoma your health insurance may cover removal .
As a general rule , a `` tummy tuck '' is viewed as cosmetic surgery and is not covered by health insurance polices . However , obesity is becoming an increasing problem in our nation.This has resulted in a growing number of people who have reached health or life threatening levels of morbid obesity for which they have had either prescription and/or surgical treatments that result in extreme weight loss . In some cases the weight gain has stretched the person 's skin to such an extent that after their extreme weight loss following treatment their skin does not return to normal levels and the person is left with folds of skin which can , in some cases , become sources of medical problems themselves -LRB- e.g. - severe rashes and infections -RRB- . In these extreme circumstances the insurance company may agree that it is an issue of medical necessity that this issue be surgically addressed and the will approve coverage for the removal or lifting of this excess skin tissue . This has been the only circumstance where I have seen an insurance carrier approve what might be construed as a tummy tuck .
Most people can get life insurance after having skin cancer . If basal cell carcinoma , the rates usually are what they would be if the person never had skin cancer . If squamous cell carcinoma , it depends on the stage of the cancer , how it was treated , and for how long the person has been skin cancer free . A standard to low table rating is common . A diagnosis of melanoma will require that the cancer was a low stage , was successfully removed without recurring , and that a certain amount of time has passed since the last treatment , in order to get a medically underwritten policy . It may have a flat extra during the first few years of the policy . If that is not available , persons with past melanoma can usually get simplified issue coverage , and can definitely get a guaranteed issue policy if they qualify age-wise .
Most major medical plans will cover medically necessary treatment by a dermatologist . This includes treatment for conditions like acne , eczema , psoriasis , cancer and so forth . Cosmetic treatment for things such as skin blemishes or tattoo removal are generally not a covered item . In some situations removal of a birth mark -LRB- such as a port wine stain -RRB- may be a covered item .
If your skin cancer is basal cell carcinoma , you can usually get life insurance at preferred ratings , as long as your other health is preferred . If it is squamous cell carcinoma , the insurance company will want to know if there was no recurrence after removal , and the stage of your cancer , if you know it . You can possibly be rated as good as standard after a year of being cancer free , and possibly better after extended years of showing no signs of skin cancer . With melanoma , it is treated like any other internal cancer . There will be a waiting period of at least a year to get a medically underwritten or simplified issue policy -LRB- unless perhaps the melanoma was in situ , or stage 0 -RRB- . If it was over stage 3 , there will most likely be a flat extra added for a while . But you can still get coverage . In time , the rates will go down as you hopefully remain cancer free .
No , basal cell carcinoma does not have much of an effect on life insurance premiums , if any . Squamous cell carcinoma does affect rates more , depending on the stage , how long ago it was removed , and whether there was any recurrence or multiple spots . Melanoma , of course , has the most significant impact on life insurance rates of cancer affecting the skin , and may cause a decline if past stage 1 occurred within the past year .
Medicare will only provide coverage for this if it 's deemed medically necessary . If you 're just trying to have excess skin removed for cosmetic purposes , you 're going to be paying for the procedure out of pocket . If it is medically necessary , Medicare will cover some of the costs , but not generally not all -LRB- likely up to 80 % with you responsible for the other 20 % -RRB- . I would make sure you have a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan as well to cover any portions of expenses you 're responsible for -LRB- and any excess charges if your doctor does not accept assignment -RRB- . If you 'd like to review options for Medicare supplement plans in your zip code , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button and I will go over the available options with you .
It 's 2016 . Let me add to this with an updated reply : We work with about 12 carriers that offer Critical Illness . There only tends to be two `` not covered areas '' with some policies . # 1 . Certain types of Skin cancer are not covered . Skin cancer means melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer . Understand if and at what level skin cancers are covered . Melanoma of the skin , the deadliest form of skin cancer , is the fifth most common type of new cancer diagnosis in American men and the seventh most common type in American women . SO make sure skin cancer is covered . # 2 Know the difference between Invasive Cancer & Carcinoma in Situ -LRB- Non-Invasive Cancer -RRB- . All policies pay a reduced amount for in Situ . Carcinoma in Situ is the earliest form of cancer which involves only the tissue where it is found and has not invaded the surrounding tissue or organs in the body . So when the cancer is smaller and localized , it 's not nearly as `` threatening '' . The benefit amount for in Situ is a percentage of the full amount . So if you bought a $ 10,000 critical illness policy , a typical plan pays 25 % of the benefit amount for in Situ . Or in this example , $ 2500 . The good news is that the other $ 7500 is still there for you to access should the cancer spread . KNOW the percentage that is paid out . I still believe some carriers only pay out at 10 % for in Situ ... I suggest a carrier that is at 25 % . So this is n't a `` not covered issue '' . Invasive vs. in Situ is just know at what level your benefit pays out . Something else ... we lean towards plans that trigger a benefit upon diagnosis , not treatment of , the critical illness . Consider the organ transplant coverage . You need the $ $ way before the actual transplant . It can take months before you are 1st in line for an organ . As with all my other posts , we let underwriting determine the best choice for someone and then the coverage for the premium paid . BYE THE BEST you can qualify for folks ... . Reach out and I can work on getting you a copy of `` Stop Wasting Your Money on Insurance '' . - gravy
Unfortunately , no . When you 're looking to have excess skin removed and it 's an elective procedure you want to have completed , Medicare is not going to cover it and you will need to pay for it out of pocket . If a doctor deemed it to be a medically necessary procedure , Medicare may provide some coverage for it .
Great question ! The answer is absolutely ! There are two types of skin cancer , one more serious than the other . If you have the simpler , more common type , it is n't generally anything that will affect your policy . They remove it , and you are cancer free . The other type is a little more serious , and can affect your policy . If you 've had this type , you can still get a preferred policy if it was in your past , and you 've not had it since . If you are fresh out of it , or had ongoing struggles , there are still policies that you can purchase . They may have a period of time where the benefit paid is reduced , and will be more expensive , but they can be purchased . If you need more information , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Basal cell carcinoma has little to no effect on life insurance rates , especially if it has been frozen or surgically removed by a dermatologist or other doctor . Squamous cell carcinoma will have more effect on life insurance rates , and the treatment must be effective -LRB- a free margin of healthy tissue surrounding where the cancer was -RRB- before a medically underwritten policy will be approved . Melanoma is the most serious form of skin cancer , but can often be covered after a period of a year or more . This is especially true if the melanoma was stage 0 to 2 . A `` flat extra '' might be charged for a set number of years . This extra charge drops off after those years have passed , whether the melanoma recurred or not . For more advanced cases of melanoma , there are some No Exam policies that can be purchased a year or two after the last cancer treatment , or `` guaranteed issue '' policies that have no health requirements but have rather narrow age restrictions .
For life insurance that is underwritten , it depends on the kind of skin cancer and how long it is has been since all treatment has ended . Acticinic keratosis , basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma , if detected early , are easily cured and are the most likely types which can result in life insurance being issued , even at standard rates . Malignant melanoma , the rarest and most virulent form of skin cancer , is responsible for 75 % of all deaths from skin cancer . This is the type where , depending on the staging and treatment , are likely to be either rated or declined . Stage IV and recurrent cases are likely to be totally uninsurable . Meet with a life insurance professional that has experience working with underwriters on cases like this for the best possible outcome .
It depends on the type of skin cancer . Basal cell is the least evasive . Underwriters want to see the severity , location and number of occurrences within a certain time period . The more serious types of skin cancers such as melanoma or a sarcoma can be so serious the risk could deem you uninsurable . Because there are so many factors and degrees of skin cancer I would use a trusted independent life insurance broker who can deal with multiple companies ' underwriters to find the best offer on life insurance before you apply . Making a mistake can cause a mark on your Medical Information Bureau or MIB report which can follow you for many years to come when applying for personal insurance like life , disability , long term care , etc. .
Video Transcript : How much is $ 1 million life insurance policy ? Are we using term life insurance or are we using permanent life insurance ? That 's going to dictate how long the coverage is going to need . Am I a male or a female ? Am I a smoker or a nonsmoker ? What 's my medical history like ? What is the para-med exam result that I have to take for the application ? I need to incorporate all those issues into what the price tag 's going to be for $ 1 million coverage , as well as , think about this ; you 're going to have to also add on , do you have a hazardous vocation ? That could be another additional price tag on top of your premium . If you have recreational issues , like I like to scuba dive or mountain climb , those also are incorporated into your price tag . If you 're looking for $ 1 million of coverage and you can answer all of those questions , you can come up with whose got the most competitive price tag throughout the life insurance carrier market .
Medical information is critical to securing the best possible underwriting offer . Your premium price tag depends on your gender , age , smoking status , health history , current medical condition and paramed exam results . Your premium price tag is also dependent on your behaviors like : motor vehicle violations , dangerous recreational activities and vocational hazards . Your premium price tag will be determined by totaling your financial liabilities , future obligations and charitable intent , so you can justify the amount of coverage youre applying for , whether that coverage is temporary or permanent . A non-smoking 25 year old male or female purchasing $ 100,000 of 10 years term life insurance will pay around $ 100 annual premium .
Your premium price tag depends on your gender , age , smoking status , health history , current medical condition and paramed exam results . Your premium price tag is also dependent on your behaviors like : motor vehicle violations , dangerous recreational activities and vocational hazards . A nonsmoking married couple in good health and both age 60 will pay around $ 300 a month for a long term care policy with an inflation rider for $ 7,000 of monthly benefit and total benefit of $ 420,000 .
There are several variables that that need to be factored in to establish a premium price tag for your parents . The price tag depends on your gender , age , smoking status , health history , current medical condition , and prescriptions . A nonsmoking male age 60 and in good health will pay around $ 5700 a year for 20 year term life insurance for $ 1,000,000 of coverage . -LRB- Female same scenario $ 3900 . -RRB-
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Spousal Life Insurance ?
Spousal life insurance is n't a special type of policy . Life insurance on spouses is a fundamental planning matter . In dual income families , it is important for both earners to consider life insurance to protect the income they each depend on as the lost of one or both would likely result in financial hardship . In the event of a stay at home spouse life insurance should be considered as the loss of that spouse may have a financial impact through new expenses such as day care .
The death of a spouse is perhaps the most emotionally traumatic event which humans experience . What would you do if your spouse died unexpectedly ? In over 55 % of married-couple families today , both marriage partners work outside the home at least part time . -LRB- 1 -RRB- Often the financial requirements to run the household substantially exceed the income of either spouse alone . If an untimely death were to occur , the inability to meet financial obligations with the single remaining spouses income might require the hasty sale of assets or , even worse , a bank foreclosure on the family residence . Life insurance is an excellent means of providing money when it is needed in these traumatic moments . Some families are fortunate enough to allow either the mother or father to stay home with small children while the other earns sufficient cash to meet household and living expenses . It is obvious that the loss of a breadwinner would create a financial calamity . Couples should consider the potential cost of replacing the services of the spouse who stays at home to care for the children . Without the deceased spouse , a surviving spouse working outside the home would face new expenditures for child care , either in the home or at a babysitter or day care center as well as someone to take the children to the doctor , dentist , piano lessons , etc. . Perhaps the surviving parent could take time off work to fulfill these obligations , but this time off work would also amount to a financial loss . Most families can help effectively remove this potential financial emergency by acquiring a life insurance policy on each spouse . Source : Statistical Abstract of the United States : 2012 , Table 700 Married-Couple Families ; data from 2009 . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
Absolutely . But there are different rules if the joint owners are a married couple or not -LRB- for example , a Father names his daughter as joint owner -RRB- . If the joint owners of the annuity are married , then it is recommended that each spouse names the other as primary beneficiary . For the spousal exception to the required distribution rules to apply , the surviving spouse must be the designated beneficiary of the contract . These rules are designed to prevent the use of joint ownership to obtain tax deferral on annuity earnings over more than one lifetime , except in the case of married couples . In the event of the owners death , the spouse can succeed to ownership by application of the spousal exception to the required distribution rule . If someone other than the surviving spouse is the designated beneficiary , or even if the spouse is the beneficiary along with another person , then even if the surviving spouse is a joint owner , the spousal exception is lost . There are some caveats to setting up a jointly owned annuity . It 's best to talk to a professional insurance agent to avoid the pitfalls .
Typically , each person has there own life insurance policy . However , a spousal rider can be added to a life policy to be included . This can cause an issue depending on how it is written . Some cases , if the primary dies first and the death claim is paid , the policy ends and the spousal rider no longer exists leaving them uninsured . I recommend buying personal policies for a number of reasons such as divorce , terminal illness , chronic illness which can cause contract issues in the future when two people are on the same plan .
Getting married may or may not have an effect on your insurance policy depending upon what actions you take . Technically adding your new spouse to your policy will not change your benefits but it may have an impact on your monthly costs . If you are covered under an individual major medical policy then you would see your monthly premium increased by the amount associated with your spouse 's age for the policy you have in force -LRB- this assumes you are covered under an Affordable Care Act compliant policy taken out on or after January 1 , 2014 when community rating went into effect -RRB- . If you are adding a spouse to an employer based policy then the financial impact will depend upon what your employer 's contribution is towards employees with dependents . Some employers contribute towards the health insurance premium costs of their employees and their covered dependents . Increasingly though , employers are contributing only towards the cost of the employee 's coverage and the employee is totally financially responsible for the difference in cost for adding a dependent to their coverage . To make things even more interesting , the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- does not define spouses as dependents ! So , while the practice has not become wide spread yet , some employers are not allowing spousal coverage under their group plans -LRB- dependent children must be covered according to the ACA -RRB- . What is more common is that if your spouse is employed and their employer offers health insurance and yet you still wanted to add your spouse to your coverage , the employer could assess a penalty charge above and beyond the additional premium cost for adding a spouse in this situation . Obviously the objective here is to discourage the addition of spouses whose cost and risk could be borne by another employer . So , adding a new spouse to your health insurance coverage may not be the simple transaction that it may have been in the past . You need to explore your options and determine what the financial implications are for adding a spouse to your coverage . In some situations you may find that it makes more sense financially to purchase individual health insurance coverage for your spouse than to add them onto your group 's health insurance plan . I would recommend you find a health insurance broker to assist you with this decision making process .
Spousal life insurance is n't a special type of policy . Life insurance on spouses is a fundamental planning matter . In dual income families , it is important for both earners to consider life insurance to protect the income they each depend on as the lost of one or both would likely result in financial hardship . In the event of a stay at home spouse life insurance should be considered as the loss of that spouse may have a financial impact through new expenses such as day care .
There are still too many variables to provide you a definitive answer . The state or states your workforce is located in , the size of your small business -LRB- less than 50 or greater than 50 employees ? -RRB- , the ages of your employees/spouses/dependent children to be covered , the number of dependent children to be covered , perhaps tobacco usage , plus factors such as health plan design all vary from group to group but are critical features defining fully insured health insurance rates in ObamaCare compliant plan designs . Speaking in very generic terms based upon marketplace quoting as of July 2014 , I would estimate unit cost ranges for small group plans -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- on a composite rated basis to generally fall within the following ranges : Employee Only : $ 250 to $ 425 Median : $ 325 Spousal Unit : $ 280 to $ 500 Median : $ 395 Per Child Unit -LRB- 3 max -RRB- $ 85 to $ 175Median : $ 120 -LRB- Note : dependent children age 21 to 26 charged separate young adult rate -RRB- This is based onno exhaustive analysis , just from what I have seen and gathered from my peers here in the mid-south . If someone were to give me the vague `` what would health insurance costs be for my small business '' questionto dosome business cost projections these would be reasonable ranges to expect to work within and approximate average costs per covered unit to experience at this time .
Yes , you can get Life Insurance on someone else . Refer to Peggy 's comment on insurable interest . Here are a few situations which you can look at getting life insurance on someone else -LRB- keep in mind , for anyone over 18 , they have to sign the application as well -RRB- : Parent insuring children , Spousal insurance , Insuring a Key -LRB- important -RRB- employee or insuring your business partner so if he passes , you can purchase his ownership from his family . If you have a situation that I did not cover here as there are more , reach out to your broker or contact one of us .
Many types of life insurance offer additional protection items called riders . some of them are free and embedded into the policy , while most cost more money to add them on to the base policy . Here 's just a few of the examples of the riders offered with life insurance : waver of premium , spousal , children , long term care , critical illness , terminal illness , etc. .
Video Transcript : What is a unit of life insurance ? Generally , most people will buy their insurance , they 'll say , `` I need $ 1/2 million or $ 100,000 . '' Sometimes , you 'll look at children or spousal attachments . Instead of doing a term writers , some people buy their extra insurance for children and spouses based on unit . Those units could be as small as $ 2000 , $ 5000 , $ 10,000 in units , and they buy them in price tags . They 've already homogenized and made a standardized price tag for each one of these units . Those units then are attached to the policy and become part of the contract . In case something happens , those units would pay out according to the death benefit amount .
Can you take out an insurance policy on my spouse ? Yes , you can , the issue would be how much in coverage you 're applying for and if consent is needed . There are some group life situations or credit group life situations where a small death benefit can be signed up for without your spouses knowledge . Usually something like a $ 1,000 to $ 15,000 in face amount . A larger amount purchased on an individual basis does require spousal consent to be covered .
This is an legal question more than a life insurance question . It is not something upon which a life insurance professional can provide a reliable opinion . That said , as the life insurance policy is a legal contract , the insurance company will be obligated to pay the named primary beneficiary . Assuming the proceeds go to a named beneficiary rather than the estate , the proceeds are not normally subject to probate so it would be unlike challenging a will in probate . Ultimately , a challenge would likely be a matter for the courts so finding experienced legal help is critical . I am aware of a few examples where beneficiary designations have been challenged . The beneficiary designation might be demonstrated to be inconsistent with state law , especially elective or spousal share rules . Or , it might be demonstrated to not conform to other agreements such as split dollar agreements , divorce decrees , etc. .
An Insurance Rider on Life Policies is simply an `` add-on '' to the base policy . For example , the base policy might be a parent who has say a 250k death benefit with a child rider which provides a little coverage for the kids in the family . There are generally several riders available on life insurance policies . They include waiver of premium , unemployment , long-term care , disability , child rider , spousal riders , a variety of accelerated benefits and more depending on the insurance company . Keep in mind , most of these riders add cost to your policy but may provide valuable extra protection .
Post-traumatic stress disorder -LRB- PSTD -RRB- has a couple of diagnostic items to review that seem to accompany this psychiatric condition . PSTD has secondary complications such as drug and/or alcohol abuse is indicator that the recovery has not been initiated . Two other items are difficulty holding down a job or divorce , sometimes spousal abuse occurs . Some life insurance companies discriminate PTSD between domestic and combat orientation . Ongoing management medication may also debit the underwriting balance sheet . All health considerations taken into account , PTSD should be standard issue with most impaired risk life insurance companies .
Where a spousal signature is required in California is when the insured decides to change the beneficiary or surrender the policy . It is assumed that the policy was purchased using community property funds in California so the spouse that never signed the application still has rights and these are recognized when the owner tries to surrender the policy or change the beneficiary .
Here in CT , a licensed driver needs to be either rated or excluded on an auto policy . The tough part is that although this can work in many situations , a spousal situation is not one of them . It may be possible if each of you have a car registered in your own name and insured on separate policies , this you really neeed to check with your Insurance Professional
Getting married enables people to move from two single policies to a husband wife policy , or from a parent and child policy to a family policy . Every carrier prices these combination policies differently . In the individual market there may not be a big difference in the rates you might pay . When purchasing coverage through employers there could be a large premium cost savings . Many employer elect to pay a portion of the spousal premium , although this practice is becoming less common .
The law states that you must offer coverage . If you have a record that coverage was offered and declined then you will not be penalized . The key here is proper record keeping . There are several reasons an employee may decline your group plan They may be able to receive coverage from a spousal plan for example . There are still many questions that need addressed in the new legislation , and there is a lot of misinformation . An agent versed in the new mandates can be of help as the deadlines approach . The coverage offered must meet the mandates affordability guidelines however .
After you make a contribution into an annuity , the value grows tax deferred . This is one of the key reasons that people invest in annuities . If you have had money invested in an annuity for a period of time there may be a large amount of deferred income . When you die your beneficiary will receive the proceeds and will have to pay income taxes on the amount of the deferred income . There is a spousal exemption to this however , so if your beneficiary is your spouse they will have the option of continuing the deferral .
If you have had a non-qualified annuity for any length of time you most like have accumulated tax deferred earnings . This means that the growth in the annuity account value has not yet been taxed . When you die and the annuity proceeds are paid , the tax deferred earnings will be taxed as ordinary income to your beneficiary . There is a spousal provision whereby if the beneficiary is your spouse they will have the option to continue to defer the taxes in the annuity . When your spouse dies , any deferred earnings still held by the annuity will now be taxable to your spouses beneficiary .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Does Auto Gap Insurance Work ?
Auto gap insurance is designed to reimburse you for the difference in the current value of the car and what you owe on the car , in the event there is a total loss . Since a car rapidly depreciates after you make the purchase , it is very possible -LRB- especially with little or no down-payment or trade-in -RRB- , that you will have this `` gap . '' Typically , the cost is not very expensive , and it can be taken out at the time you purchase the vehicle . You can also purchase a gap policy to cover your deductible , which will reduce your out-of-pocket costs . As an experienced car insurance broker , this coverage is often discussed with our customers . You can often buy coverage from your broker , lending institution or dealership .
James is right on . This is typically going to be upsold heavily at the auto dealership . If it is not required by the financing company and you are interested in coverage you will often be better served to shop around rather than going with the policy the dealership offers you .
Auto insurance Gap coverage is a physical damage coverage that pays the difference between the loan balance and the actual cash value of the vehicle If it is totaled . This coverage is usually purchased on leased vehicles , but can be purchased on conventionally financed vehicles also . Contact an agent before you purchase the car and coverage to have an idea what the coverage will cost . With that information you can compare at the dealership to decide if want it and if you can get a better price with your agent or the dealership .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
An important question in view of the growth in high deductible health plans as well as the growing number of health plan designs doing away with office visit and prescription drug copayments and making such services subject to the plan deductible and/or co-insurance . The trend is clearly for higher out-of-pocket health care expenses for many people . Properly designed GAP policies can help address many of potential medical out-of-pocket expenses a person might encounter . Poorly designed GAP policies can still leave the person with substantial out-of-pocket expenses . There are a wide variety of GAP policies currently available with more to come I am sure . The value and cost of a GAP policy will vary depending upon the type of coverage gap -LRB- s -RRB- you are trying to fill or minimize , the premium cost associated with the GAP policy , and what is covered under the GAP policy . Each individual will have to make a risk determination as to whether the amount of financial exposure is great enough and the probability of incurring covered claims is great enough to justify the GAP plan 's premium payment . Someone with office visit/urgent care and ER & prescription drug copays , a $ 1000 deductible and a $ 4000 out of-pocket maximum probably does n't need a GAP policy . On the other hand , someone with $ 6350 deductible and a two office visits/yr covered at a $ 50 copy - that person could probably use a GAP plan . Seek out an experienced , qualified health insurance broker to help you make the GAP policy decision and to find the GAP policy best suited to your needs if a GAP policy is an answer .
GAP coverage is generally purchased on a brand newvehicleeither by the lender or the insurance carrier when youpurchaseyour auto insurance . This coverage is designed to fill the GAP between what the car is valued at and the actual loan amount should there be a total loss . Auto insurance is paid on an ACV -LRB- actual cash value basis -RRB- . In the example of a new car , you may have purchased avehicleworth $ 40,000 and took out a loan . Say for example one year later you total thevehicleand the value of thevehiclea the time of loss is $ 35,000 . This amount is what the insurance company will pay . However due to interest rates and other varying factors your loan amount could be $ 38,000 at the time of loss leaving you with a $ 3,000 out of pocket expense . Or in other words a Gap . However , if you purchased the GAP coverage the Gap would be met by either the lender or insurance company , whoever you took the coverage out with . I always recommend GAP coverage on anewlypurchased vehicle . This coverage generally stays on your policy for 2-3 years and then falls offdependingon the insurance carrier . Talk to your local agent about GAP coverage on your newly purchased vehicle .
On an auto insurance policy gap coverage covers the gap between the cars ACV or Actual Cash Value vs. the loan value of a vehicle . This is a coverage that is purchased when a car is less then a year old and is available on most auto insurance polices for 2 to 3 years and then falls off . An example would be you purchase a brand new car for $ 20,000 and you take out a loan for $ 18,000 . Within a year you total the car . The market value or actual cash value of the car at the time of the accident is $ 16,500 due to quick depreciation . However due to the size of loan and interest rates keeping your principle up you may own $ 17,500 at the time of the accident . This makes a $ 1,000 gap the insurance company is not obligated to pay . Gap insurance would fill this gap so your loan is completely paid off and your not backwards . I recommend you have this discussion with your local agent when purchasing a new vehicle .
Medigap plans cover the gaps in cost that Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- does not cover . Medicare Part A & Part B only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medigap Plan is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- all or a portion of that other 20 % , depending on which Medigap plan you have -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it limits the expenses a senior can be exposed to by creating a very predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medigap plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Gap Insurance is a product that was introduced a few years ago to offset a raise in deductible . Many employers have introduced this product , as health insurance has become unaffordable . So how this product works is the employer would raise the major medical deductible from $ 2500 to $ 5000 . There would be a second policy -LRB- Gap Insurance -RRB- that would offset the increase in deductible . Anything that is covered by the major medical plan and was applied to the deductible would be covered by the gap plan .
I answered a similar question recently but the answer is the same : Also known as ` Medicare Supplement insurance ' , a ` Medi-gap insurance ' policy helps to fill some or all of the financial `` gaps '' between what a person 's Medicare insurance pays and what is left unpaid . For example , it can pay health care expenses incurred , which are unpaid by Medicare such as your deductible , your co-payments & your co-insurance . Medicare Supplement or ` Medi-gap insurance ' does not cover dental , vision , long-term care and some other items . Check to see if you need a separate Medicare Prescription Drug Plan - Part D . You probably will . You need to be under Medicare parts A & B to qualify for a ` Medi-gap ' policy . A lot of well-known carriers are able to sell this type of insurance in each State . Be sure to shop around .
Medigap Insurance , also called `` Medicare Supplement '' Insurance works with original Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- to provide coverage for the `` gaps '' - the coinsurance and deductibles required to be paid by the Medicare beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- under original Medicare . Although Medicare represents excellent insurance coverage , these `` gaps '' can be expensive for the consumer . For example , the Part A -LRB- hospitalization -RRB- deductible for 2015 is $ 1,260 , and the Part B -LRB- doctors costs , etc. -RRB- is $ 147 plus 20 % coinsurance . A Medigap policy insures these potentially large `` gaps '' with the payment of a known monthly premium . Medigap Insurance is optional for the consumer - there is no `` requirement '' to purchase it , although it is a good idea to get some Medigap coverage if staying with original Medicare . Alternatively , Medicare beneficiaries may select a Medicare Advantage Plan . Although there are costs and limitations in Medicare Advantage Plans , a beneficiary does not need , nor can they purchase Medigap Insurance under a Medicare Advantage Plan .
Auto gap insurance is designed to reimburse you for the difference in the current value of the car and what you owe on the car , in the event there is a total loss . Since a car rapidly depreciates after you make the purchase , it is very possible -LRB- especially with little or no down-payment or trade-in -RRB- , that you will have this `` gap . '' Typically , the cost is not very expensive , and it can be taken out at the time you purchase the vehicle . You can also purchase a gap policy to cover your deductible , which will reduce your out-of-pocket costs . As an experienced car insurance broker , this coverage is often discussed with our customers . You can often buy coverage from your broker , lending institution or dealership .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . If you have any questions about Medicare supplement plans or would like to review programs available in your zip code , please send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button or visit my profile page for my direct contact information .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well .
Medigap is another name for Medicare Supplement plans . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medigap plan is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a very controlled and predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons , and any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
That is an excellent question ! There is a `` gap '' between what your Medicare coverage pays for , and what the provider charges for the treatment . That difference , along with your co-pays and deductibles are what you have to come up with . For many folks , that amount is too much . So insurers offer Medigap plans , or supplemental insurance plans , to help fill in that `` gap '' . The good part is that the plans provide a stable , easily accepted way to help cut your costs ; the bad part is that there are many to choose from , and it can be very difficult to find the one that will work best for you . It is important that you work with your health care professional to get what is best for you . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Is Renters Insurance Per Person ?
Renters insurance typically covers the insured and the insured 's immediate family living within the covered premise . If there are other tennats within the rented premise that are not immediate family members then they should secure their own renters insurance coverage . Remember that every policy is different , please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
I presume you are asking about the individual mandate requirement of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and the tax penalty associated with not having health insurance or health insurance that meets the requirements of the Affordable Care Act . The term `` levy '' is technically inaccurate as that is an assessment applied to a population in general . Persons without health insurance in 2014 will be subject to a tax penalty when they file their 2014 tax returns in 2015 . The penalty for being uninsured in 2014 will be $ 95 per adult and $ 47.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 285 per household -RRB- or 1 % of their Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- , whichever is greater . The tax penalty for being uninsured in 2015 will increase to $ 325 per adult and $ 162.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 975 per household -RRB- or 2 % of their MAGI , whichever is greater . If you persist in being uninsured in 2016 the tax penalty jumps to $ 695 per adult and $ 347.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 2085 per household -RRB- or 2.5 % of MAGI , whichever is greater . In subsequent years the tax penalty will be adjusted upward by the inflation rate . As the law is currently constructed , the tax penalties described above can only be collected by the IRS from any income tax refund that the taxpayer would have received . The IRS can not bill the taxpayer for the penalty , place a lien on their assets or criminally prosecute the taxpayer . Obviously , this means that an uninsured person 's tax penalty on paper and what their true penalty -LRB- if any -RRB- might be will be directly related to whether they are eligible for a tax refund . So , a person 's ability to structure their tax withholding during the course of the year , or in the case of self-employed persons making estimated tax payments , so that they have little or no refund or owe additional taxes when filing their tax return may largely negate or eliminate the tax penalty for being uninsured .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
I have seen renters insurance range in my area from about $ 90 to $ 300 per year for renters insurance within my area . The cost of coverage for renters insurance is typically less per month than you spend for lunch for one day . The amount of coverage for personal property typically starts at $ 15000 of coverage but can go to over 100000 under most carriers . Contact your local agent to find out what coverage he/she has available and the cost associated with it .
Most people consider purchasing renter 's insurance to cover their personal belongings - most renter 's policies will pay for the loss of personal property due to theft , vandalism , fire , etc. . However , a renter 's policy can also provide coverage if you are personally liable for injury to another person or damage to their property due to a non-vehicle related incident . In addition , a renter 's policy may also pay for `` loss of use '' due to a covered loss , meaning if you are forced to temporarily relocate due to said loss , there may be coverage for related expenses . Renter 's insurance is typically very affordable . Premiums can vary from one person to another , and some companies may offer better prices than others depending on your location , but I 've seen renter 's policies as low as $ 9 or $ 10/month . Please bear in mind that there are a lot of variables that affect your rate , and you may or may not be able to find renter 's insurance for this kind of price .
Renters Insurance covers the Personal Property of the Insured Tenant , offers Loss of Use for a covered hazard and provides Personal Liability for the Insured Tenant and resident family . The Renters Insurance Policy is commonly known as a Form HO4 and is available in all States . Renters Insurance is mandatory in a few States where the Government has been faced with an unusually high number of law suits thus inundating the legal system ; in other States , you will find some Landlords require tenants to purchase the insurance to provide a layer of protection for the possible negligent acts of a tenant causing property damage to the building , property of other tenants or inadvertent bodily injury to others . The possession of Renters Insurance is a display of genuine responsibility for one 's personal property and protection for others . Renters Insurance Online is available online in multiple States at the following link : WEBSITELINK In order to produce a lower premium , it is recommended only to purchase the minimum amount of Personal Contents coverage to sufficiently replace the personal property of the insured and to select a high deductible . This combination will generate a comparatively lower premium ; renters insurance is written for an annual term and is fairly inexpensive .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
`` Life insurance per unit '' is the cost of life insurance per thousand dollars of coverage . Child Riders are priced per unit . E.g. a $ 10,000 child rider may cost $ 60 per year , or $ 6.00 per unit . Flat extras are also charged by unit . The insurance company may add on $ 7.50 per unit of life insurance for 3 years after having surgery for prostate cancer . For a $ 100,000 policy , that would add on $ 750 per year , but then the flat extra would drop off after three years and the policy would cost $ 750 less . You can also price your own policy if you know the cost of one unit of life insurance . E.g. . If you are buying a final expense policy that costs $ 50 per unit , a $ 10,000 policy will cost $ 500 per year .
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
Renters Insurance can be purchased Online ! Renters Insurance is designed to protect tenants from financial loss due to damage or theft of Personal Property and protection from cases of Personal Liability . In order to obtain a quick and free quote for renters insurance , you will need to state the amount of personal property coverage you desire , the personal liability limit and the deductible for the policy . If shopping for the cheapest possible premium , you should request the minimum amount of personal contents coverage that is acceptable to you , the lowest limit of personal liability -LRB- $ 100,000 -RRB- and the highest available deductible . Once you have the rate quote , you can proceed with the purchase of your renters insurance policy . The link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States may be used directly by Consumers . WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance is a must have for everyone who rents a home or apartment and it 's very inexpensive . Renters insurance typically cost between $ 100 - $ 200 per year depending on how much personal property coverage you need . Renters insurance will cover your belongings and provide liability coverage . Renters insurance even covers personal property away from your home or apartment . For example , someone breaks into your car and steels your iPad . Most policies limit coverage away from your residence premise to 10 % but the example would be a covered loss .
Travelers Insurance Company has an excellent renters insurance policy . The Form HO-4 covers Personal Property and Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant -LRB- insured -RRB- . Renters Insurance is a very valuable coverage because it no only offers protection against damage to your personal property but also protection against negligence and personal liability cases that may be brought against you . One valuable example is if there is fire , smoke or water damage to the rented home or apartment unit , the property owner 's insurance company will most likely attempt to collect damages from the tenant if they can prove negligence . In this case , Renters Insurance will provide the legal representation to handle the situation although the policy limit will apply . If you are not sure and do n't really want to commit to purchase renters insurance but may or may not be required to according to your lease agreement , the best way to generate the lowest annual premium is to select the minimum personal property coverage available , the lowest limit of personal liability and the highest available deductible for the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does A Whole Life Insurance Policy Work ?
Participating whole life insurance is the most cryptic contract in the insurance and financial product inventory . It is difficult to disassemble into distinguishable parts . That being said , a base policy in participating whole life insurance is a guaranteed premium for a guaranteed death benefit for the maturity of the contract , generally between age 100 and 121 . The dominate portfolio of many participating whole life insurance company is investment grade government bonds . Those portfolio returns coupled with a return of unused premium form the basis of a dividend .
What is the best type of life insurance to purchase ? The answer depends on what you want the insurance for and for how long the coverage is needed . Life insurance basically creates cash at death which can be used to create or conserve wealth . There are additional features available depending on the type of plan and how you are planning to use it in your overall financial planning . Here are the main types of life insurance and some factors to consider : Term life insurance As the name implies , coverage is for a specified term : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 years , etcetera . At the end of the term the term the policy renews at a higher premium . Factors to consider include : how long you need the coverage for , the rate at renewal and if you will need to convert to permanent insurance . Whole life insurance With whole your coverage is for your whole life . The factors to consider include whether the policy is participating and is eligible for dividends or non-participating . In addition the policy guarantees such as premium and cash value . The company financials and dividend history are important considerations especially when considering a participating whole life policy . Universal life insurance Coverage for your whole life if properly managed . This type of coverage offers more flexibility in premium level , insurance cost and investment options . These are all factors to consider . Working with an independent insurance broker , who understands your needs , will help you decide on the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
There is n't a correct answer to this question , only the answer each individual comes to in regard to their wants and needs . The catch to the decision of when or how much to buy is the longer you wait the more expensive it becomes to purchase . Something to consider that rarely is considered is the purchase of Whole Life insurance is control . A whole life is the one policy where the price is set at the begining and stays that way through the life of the policy . With term the insured does not really control cost the insurance carrier does through the life of the policy . An insurance company can not change or alter a whole life policy without your permission . Since you can combine policies and types of coverage -LRB- it is never all or nothing -RRB- how much whole life is entirely up to you . The split is up to the individual . Some people carry combinations of policies with the idea that they will shed the term as time goes by , ending up with the whole life at the end of a long happy life . Last thought on this subject . An insurance company has less power over the insured with whole life . They have to `` ask '' you and you have to agree to any changes . Where this can be reassuring is if your health changes down the road . I have several serious health conditions and it is good to know my life insurance company can not raise my price or change anything without my say so .
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
There are several difference between Whole Life and Term Life Insurance . Put very simply , here are some : 1 -RRB- Term life insurance lasts for a `` term '' ; Whole life lasts for one 's `` whole life '' . These both depend on payments to last that long . 2 -RRB- Term life insurance does not have cash value ; Whole life insurance has cash value . Again , how the policy and payments are set up will determine the amount of cash value . 3 -RRB- Term life insurance only protects against death ; Whole life has options to use the policy while alive . There are some Term policies that now offer `` living options '' , as well ; however , Whole Life offers even more options than those .
A whole life insurance policy is an extremely flexible product that can meet many needs in retirement . The most obvious need is death . It is obvious that retirement always ends in death . Death is not inexpensive . The proceeds of a whole life insurance policy can pay off some or all of those expenses . After a certain age term policies can not be written at any price . I recently had a client who forgot that there was a life policy on her husband . She was paying his funeral expenses on an installment plan . I discovered the policy and brought it to her attention . She was delighted . Another use of a whole life policy is to transfer property to heirs . Often a person will want to leave money to children , grandchildren or a favorite charity . They will then try to conserve their retirement assets so that money will be available when the die . Unfortunately they often rob themselves of lifes simple pleasures in their drive to provide that inheritance . A life insurance policy can do that at the beginning of retirement leaving the person the balance of assets to spend as they wish . Some people have estates that are subject to estate tax . The problem with estate tax is that if there isnt cash to pay the taxes , assets are often sold at below market value to pay the tax . Having cash can make the difference of keeping the family business going , maintaining the family farm or closing them up for taxes . Since that can happen at any time , a whole life policy is particularly flexible in that regard . Whole life insurance is often used when a person wants to leave a specific valuable asset to one child but wants to treat all the children in the same manner . The heirs that are not going to get that valuable asset could receive equivalent proceeds from a whole life policy and everyone would be happy . A whole life policy is often used to purchase the interest of another party in a business . In this case the surviving partners dont particularly want to share everything with a widow who may not be acquainted with the business . A whole life policy can provide the cash to take care of that situation by giving the survivors the funds they need to purchase the widows interests . Sometimes whole life insurance is used to fund day to day living expenses in retirement . I just finished a comparison that showed that a whole life policy performed as well as a fixed annuity in accumulating money for retirement and that it did that with the promise to pay the full benefit should the person die before retiring . The whole life policy has non-forfeiture provisions which can pay a lifetime stream of income if desired or the policy would also give the person the flexibility to use the policy in other ways depending upon future , unforeseen events . This may sound strange but I often get requests for whole life insurance from older individuals . They seem to appreciate the value of lasting protection at a fixed price .
Whole life policies are well suited for needs that do not diminish over time . Some commonly found uses for whole life are : Family protection : To provide funds to support a surviving spouse and/or minor children , particularly for individuals who start a family later in life ; to pay final bills , such as medical or other estate expenses and federal and state death taxes . Business planning : Whole life insurance is often used for many different business purposes , such as insuring key employees , in split-dollar insurance arrangements , and funding non-qualified deferred compensation plans . Business continuation planning often involves using whole life insurance as a source of funds for buy-sell agreements . Accumulation needs : Some individuals will use the cash value feature of whole life as a way of accumulating funds for specific purposes , such as funding college education , or as a supplemental source of retirement income . Charitable gifts : To provide funds for a gift to charity . Whole life insurance , sometimes called permanent insurance , or ordinary life , is designed to stay in force throughout ones lifetime . As long as the policy owner meets his or her obligations under the policy , the policy remains in force , regardless of any changes in health that may occur . Unlike term insurance , where premium payments generally increase , as the insured gets older -LRB- the chance of death increases with age -RRB- , premiums for most whole life policies remain level . A portion of each premium payment is set aside to earn interest . Over time , a whole life policy will develop cash values . The accumulated cash values form a reserve which enable the insurer to pay a policys full death benefit , while keeping premiums level . During life , many whole life policies have provisions to borrow a portion of the accumulated cash value . If a policy is terminated without the insured dying , there are various surrender options for the cash value available to a policy owner . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
What is the best Whole Life Policy ? While there is no direct answer to this , the best answer is whatever policy will best protect your family . There are different types of whole life policies . The most common is ordinary whole life , also called `` straight Life '' or `` Permanent '' -LRB- cash value -RRB- Insurance . You pay a level premium for the rest of your life , as long as you are making your monthly premiums . The premium never increases and your policy accumulates cash value . How much life insurance -LRB- death benefit -RRB- will you need ? That determines on a number of factors such as : Do you have any children/grandchildren you want to leave money to ? How much of your income does your spouse depend on ? Who depends on you financially ? How much debt do you owe ? Do you want to leave money to your favorite charity ? You want to make sure you buy enough life insurance to cover your financial obligations if an unexpected or untimely death occurs . It is also important your premium fit 's within your budget . Because if you ca n't afford it , it is n't any good for you or your family . An insurance agent is the best person to get with to compare the different types of life insurance and find a policy that best suits your situation . I work with many top insurance carriers with the most competitive rates . I 'll do the shopping for you ! Thank you & Be Well , Mendy Douglas www.iflretirement.com/mendy-douglas/
Whole life is not necessarily better than term insurance , but it can be . Whole life provides coverage , as the name suggests , for the whole of your life , it does not expire like most term policies . Whole life policies usually have cash values which grow in a tax advantaged way . In addition , whole life can provide additional financial and retirement planning opportunities . With term insurance you pay for the coverage and in most cases that is what you get - life insurance at a specified price for a specified term . If you need coverage for the long term , then whole life could be better . If you need coverage for the short term , then term insurance could be better . Another product to consider is Universal Life which could be better . What policy is right for you depends on your individual situation . An independent insurance broker can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
Graded Benefit Whole Life Insurance is whole life insurance that pays a reduced benefit during the first one to three years , then pays the full death benefit after that . E.g. . If death occurred during year one or two , it may pay back all you paid in , plus 10 % . If death occurred during year three or afterwards , it would pay the beneficiary the whole death benefit . Different policies are graded a different number of years , and each carrier has their own criteria for how much is paid back during the graded years . Most graded benefit whole life policies are only graded for natural death . I.e. death due to illness or old age . They usually pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one for accidental death . Guaranteed issue whole life policies are graded , and some simplified issue policies are graded . Simplified issue policies are those that do not require an exam . The biggest thing to watch out for with graded whole life insurance is whether the premium stays level for life . Some graded whole life policies have premiums that go up at regular intervals . With some , the company may raise the premiums at any time , as long as they do so for everyone owning that type of policy . If you anticipate living longer than a few years , it is best to buy a graded benefit whole life policy where the premium will stay level for the rest of your life . Please feel free to contact me at any time if you would like to see whether you qualify for an immediate benefit policy , or to get some competitive quotes for several graded benefit policies that have the price locked in for life .
When does whole life make sense ? While I would like to say `` anytime '' , I ca n't . Whole life makes sense when it has time to work . 20 + years and a whole life is an excellent product , probably the best you can do long term . However , when you have limited your time by waiting till later in life to purchase life insurance , the cost of whole life can be prohibitive . Then a GUL -LRB- guaranteed universal life -RRB- starts to make more sense as it can provide lifetime protection at a set stable cost that would be less than Whole life . Whole life still could be a possibility , but usually the cost is up there .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Whole Life covers you for your `` whole life '' . Term Life covers you for a term , or set number of years . Whole Life has cash value that can be utilized while you are still alive . Term Life does not -LRB- except for Term with living benefits , which allows you to use part of the death benefit if certain triggers are met -RRB- . Whole Life allows you to pay the entire premium at once , or in a limited number of years , after which no more premiums are owed . Term Life requires that you make periodic payments over the entire duration of the policy . If you drop a Whole Life policy after some length of time , you will usually have a reduced paid up policy that you can keep without making further premium payments . If you drop a Term policy , your coverage ends and you do not have any return of cash -LRB- unless you buy ROP , or return of premium Term Life -RRB- . With participating Whole Life , you may get dividend checks over the years . With Term Life , the only benefit you get will be if you die before the term ends . Whole Life costs more because it is a permanent product and has cash value in addition to death protection . Term Life costs less because it is temporary and offers pure death protection .
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
First off , excellent question . Whole Life Insurance is backed by the full faith and credit of the Carrier offering it . In many cases , Whole Life is sold by career insurance agents and they are `` captive '' to their carrier . That means that the agent does n't have a choice of carriers that might be offered . But there are ways for `` independent '' established agents who can offer multiple carriers and probably the best AGENT that can sell it to you . Once you decide on a agent who will be your advocate , like a real estate agent , they would work on your behalf and show you your options . The top Whole Life Carriers are as follows and in no particular order : Northwestern Mutual , New York Life , Mass Mutual , Guardian , Ohio National , Penn Mutual and MetLife . When comparing these carrier 's products , make sure that you understand how they credit their earnings -LRB- i.e. dividends -RRB- as you become an owner of the company with these policies and their performance is directly correlated with the health and well being of the carrier itself . And do n't just look at the current rate , or listen to an agent 's promise of how it will perform , because this life insurance will be with you for your WHOLE LIFE . It is a long term commitment that will protect your family , provide access to cash when you need it , and even can provide Long Term Care protection that is paid out of the policy while you are alive .
Term Life Insurance is a temporary policy with very few moving parts . It has no cash value ; pays no dividends ; can not be paid off early ; and when the term is up , it goes way up in price , or else the policy simply ends . As such , it also usually costs less per thousand dollars of coverage than Whole Life costs . Whole Life accumulates cash value that can be borrowed from , used to pay the policy premium in later years , or collected if the policy is surrendered . It may pay periodic dividends . Whole Life policy premiums can be paid over one 's lifetime , or in one single premium , or over a set number of years . The biggest difference between Term and Whole Life is that Whole Life is permanent insurance that will last your `` whole '' lifetime . With these features , Whole Life usually has a higher premium than Term Life , although it is possible that if you keep buying new Term policies throughout your life , the cumulative premium of Whole Life may be lower than the sum total of all the Term policies , especially if your health declined over the years .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Do I Need To Purchase Auto Insurance ?
To purchase auto insurance , you should have a valid driver 's license , a car that you own , proof of identification , and and a small amount of money to make the first payment if you want the policy to be effective the same day . But just as importantly , you need an experienced broker -LRB- there are many of us along with our websites -RRB- to help you shop , compare and understand your policy . And of course ... get the lowest rates .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover your auto while in the garage . Homeowners insurance covers the home and not autos . Only your auto insurance policy can protect your auto while in the garage . If you have an auto you do not drive and just store in your garage I would recommend purchasing comprehensive coverage only on your auto .
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
The average cost in the US has been around $ 850 for the past several year . My data could be a bit off and old , but in the last several years competition for auto business has kept pricing static . Here is the basic issue question : I do n't know who you are in a demographic sense , but also in the sense of needing coverage to protect yourself . . Auto Insurance is regulated by the various 50 states and can a bit different in what coverages are required to be offered.But here is what typically comprises and auto policy : Bodily Injury Liability -LRB- protection for the people you kill or injure -RRB- Property Damage -LRB- for the car you hit or the 18 wheeler you force off the road unintentionally -RRB- Medical Payments for the little issue that happens in your car that you do n't want to have to file suit against some one to be indemnified -LRB- i.e. your passenger catching their finger in the closing of a door -RRB- Collision for damage to your own car in a wreck or hitting a curb or a pot hole etc. . ComprehensiveCoverage : for theft , flood , hail , falling trees , broken windshields etc And last , but probably the most important coverage on your policy , Uninsured and Under-insured Motorist Coverage So , despite all the ads to the contrary you ought to take more than 15 minutes to figure , with the help of an agent , what exposures you have . The worst scenarios have nothing to do with fixing your cars , it is about fixing peoples lives and keeping you assets . So to answer your question I would need to know what do you have to lose , if you cause injury to someone else , because what you do not pay for in insurance you will pay for on your own including future garnishment of your income . A fairly decent rule of thumb to consider things by would be to look at your lifestyle . If you already own your own home -LRB- including with a mortgage -RRB- you need a minimum of 100/300/100 spit limits of Bodily Injury Coverage -LRB- that protects the people you hit -RRB- and you should carry the same to protect yourself , your family and passengers in your car with the same limit of 100/300/100 for Uninsured and under insured motorist coverage . If you do not understand how all of these pieces of the coverage fit together then you should really seek out an Independent agent who sells for multiple companies and can tailor the policy to your needs If you live in AZ , CA , TX , GA , or MO I would be glad to assist you -LRB- call 1-866-933-4372 -RRB- -LRB- open 8 AM to 8 PM Est Monday through Friday -RRB- . If you live elsewhere seek out an Independent Agent in your area Good luck to you and I hope this answer helps some Jack Heller , CPCU
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
The trick to this is getting quotes that are comparable.There are so many more nuances in Homeowners coverages than on auto . So start out with what coverages you have now . Start with the amount of insurance on Coverage A of your policy . Does this really reflect the replacement cost of your property ? Now look at the ancillary coverages : Do you have water/sewer back up ? Does the limit include both dwelling and contents or only one or the other . Do you have Law and Ordinance Coverage what is the percentage ? What about personal injury coverage ? Do you have a schedule or need specific coverage on jewelry , watches or furs or similar expensive items limited in the existing policy by a dollar value ? If so what is it ? Do you need special circumstantial coverage for a home based business , ? Do you have home Warranty Coverage ? Do you have Earthquake coverage ? Is it constrained by a per cent deductible ? If so what is it ? I think you will get the picture . then I would suggest you give an independent agency a call or visit their website . We would be glad to help you , but perhaps you are not in the Atlanta area and want some local contact . We understand that but our recommendation to an independent agent is still sound advice as they typically will have multiple companies to compare .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
That is a very hard question for the average consumer to answer . Many people have these predetermined ideas about insurance -LRB- such as , only buy term and invest the difference or you must have a whole life policy -RRB- . Keep in mind the only reason any insurance exists is insurers focused on needs in the marketplace and created policies to address them . That being said I believe you need to have a consultative approach . This means that you need to meet with someone who is focused on providing people the right type of insurance and is not trying to push all people to one particular product . You need to do as you would with your doctor ; give them info on what you think you need , answer their questions and allow them to make some suggestions for insurance that clearly meet your needs . An example ; if you were to say `` I want as much insurance as my dollars will afford and I only need it for 10 years '' then you only have a few options to consider . You did n't say you need cash accumulation or insurance to last a lifetime . When the agent gives you options let him show you how what he is suggesting meets your needs . You may have some ideas as to what type of insurance you need but give him/her the benefit of the doubt in proving to you that their suggestions meet your needs . Do n't just buy insurance ; purchase the type of insurance that meets your needs and fits into your budget . You will be glad you did
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Renters Insurance Should You Get ?
There is a simple way to determine how much coverage to purchase on a renters policy . Get a camera and take a picture of every room to include closets and dressers . Dispassionately list the things that you see in the photos that are your property . Alongside the list enter the cost to buy a replacement item . This should actually become two lists because you can list the value of the used item or the cost of a new replacement item . Total the lists and decide if you want replacement cost coverage or just want to have the used stuff replaced with other used stuff . The number that you select then becomes the amount of personal property insurance that you should purchase . However , the really important figure is often neglected and that is the amount of liability insurance do you require . My rule of thumb is get as much as the company will write . A lawsuit can ruin you day and your future . Someone could slip inside your apartment and have major problems and you need coverage because you might be responsible .
That is a question I hear everyday and thankfully the answer is usually the same : The amount you need to cover the contents you own in your rental unit . Whether you are renting a small one bedroom apartment or a full house you need to take an accurate inventory of your belongings to make sure that you have the right amount of coverage to replace EVERYTHING that you own . In the past I have heard people using a rule of thumb at $ 10,000 per room rented . That includes the kitchen and bathrooms . The amount can increase if you have high end furniture or an expensive wardrobe . If you have collectibles , jewelry or other valuable items you might want to look at getting an inland marine policy to cover those items separately .
Rich gives you a great answer , let me just add a few comments . While many folks renting are aware of the value of your contents remember that you want to be sure to specify to your agent that you want replacement cost coverage . Getting a settlement of $ 10 for that 200 lb TV is not what you want . You want to have enough coverage to replace your contents . The other thing I want to point out is that the liability coverage inthe renters policy like the liability section of homeowners in general is very competitivelypriced . Do n't skimp here . If you are inclined to buy a 100.000 in coverage , ask your agent how much more would 300,000 . be . i think you will be pleasantly surprised .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
-- > Normal 0 How much Renters Insurance should you buy ? Ideally enough to replace all the stuff you have that makes up your life . Clothes , furniture , dishes , jewelry , food , books , recreational toys , etc. . Your list will be unique to you . How much insurance you purchase is important but so isnt the type of coverage you purchase and the insurer you purchase the policy from . Basic renters policies will reimburse you for the Actual Cash Value of your damaged property . That means the value of used clothing , used furniture , an old computer . You , on the other hand , will most likely need to replace your damaged property with new items . The difference between new and old is often significant . Make sure whatever limit you buy includes Replacement Cost coverage . Under this type of coverage , you are entitled to claim the value of a new item should you actually replace it with one of similar kind and quality . Of course , the most the insurer will pay will be the limit you select . If you can afford it , that limit should be at least what you would have to spend to replace all those items you could not get along without . Most renters policies provide property coverage on a Named Peril basis . In other words , the policy will state the specific type of damage your property will be covered for . To be covered you have to prove to the insurer one of the covered perils caused the damage , a process not everyone is comfortable with . It is good to have someone on your side when this occurs . Often you cant find that person that sold you your coverage on the phone or over the Internet when you have a claim . Its nice to have a local person to seek assistance from . Watch out for limitations on specific types of property . Youll most likely find one for the theft of jewelry or silver , and jewelry often includes costume jewelry . Some of these limitations can be increased for a nominal premium or your can specifically insure unusual or expensive items . Personal liability coverage will also be provided . That limit should be not less than $ 100,000 and consistent with limits you might carry on your car insurance .
There is no set guideline to how much you should pay for Term Life Insurance . There are general guidelines . E.g. . If you take a 10 year term policy , you should pay less than you would pay for a 30 year term policy . If the rates are similar you are much better off locking that rate in for 30 years . Another general guideline would be , if you can get a permanent policy for a price just slightly higher than term , take the permanent policy . Sometimes Universal Life rates run close to Term rates at older ages , especially if the UL rates are locked in to age 90 or 95 . Universal Life is much more flexible than Term , so if you can get it for a similar price , go for it . Aside from generalities , no one can predict how much you should pay for a term life insurance policy because life insurance rates are based on your age , sex , tobacco status , and health . You can check out an instant quote engine on internet websites to get an idea of what term rates might run for you . But you need to call the agency to get a more accurate rate .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
The best way to think about it is , to imagine that your unit has been gutted by a fire . You have lost everything that you own . How much money will you want ? If you take pictures of your unit you will know what you had . If you estimated the replacement cost for each item , you would know how much you would want . I suggest that number guide you in selecting a renters policy . If a process server appears at your door with a lawsuit , how much back up do you want ? I suggest you take as much liability coverage as the insurance company offers .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Get Life Insurance If You Are An Alcoholic ?
Great question ! The one thing that we really need to know about life is that our actions always seem to have consequences that we are never aware of ... Alcoholism is one of those , as I 'm sure you have learned . If you are working on your sobriety , awesome ! My prayers and support are with you . If you have been sober for a while , and have not had any major health issues as a result of the disease , you can purchase a good insurance policy . If there have been issues as a result of your drinking , there are still policies that you can get , however they will typically be more expensive -LRB- called graded , modified , or guaranteed issue policies -RRB- and they will have a period of time where your payout is limited to what you paid in , plus some interest . I hope that helps , if not , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Being an alcoholic does n't prohibit you from obtaining life insurance . Alcoholism is accepted as a disease and if controlled it really does n't impact you . Certainly it poses some degree of risk and that would be considered in the underwriting process . There may well be a rating applied and thus a higher premium required than for a person who is not an alcoholic and has all other conditions the same , but insurance is obtainable .
The insurance companies look at several factors in determining if they wish to issue the policy for life insurance coverage . You say you are an alcoholic . Are you being treated for kidney problems ? What is your record as far as being arrested for public drunkeness or stopped and issued a DUI citation . Are you able to hold a regular job ? The liklihood that you would be denied coverage with a `` standard '' company is high . There are `` guaranteed issue '' life insurance policies such as `` final expense '' policies that you may find available .
If you are a recovering alcoholic who has abstained from alcohol for a number of years , you can get life insurance at a competitive rate with persons who are not alcoholics . If you have been through treatment one or more times and are drinking now , you will probably need to purchase a simplified or guaranteed issue policy .
Long term alcohol usage can cause cirrhosis of the liver , which will also cause liver function test elevations . This would most likely have a significant impact on your premium at best and would cause you to be declined for life insurance at worst . The casual use of alcohol can also have a direct impact on your life insurance in several ways . Alcohol consumption in the hours prior to a blood test will often cause some liver enzyme elevations . These small elevations could make the difference between rating categories causing you to pay a higher premium than you would have otherwise . In some cases it is also possible that a small elevation could cause you to be declined for life insurance . Consider a person who had a DUI conviction twenty years ago . On it 's own , this might not have any impact on a current life insurance application . Likewise slight liver function test elevations may not be a major concern to the underwriter . However , in combination this may lead to the impression that there is a long term alcohol problem . This is one of the reasons that we always recommend that applicants abstain from alcohol consumption for at least 24 hours prior to their exam .
If someone is defined as an being an alcoholic after the life insurance policy is issued , and there was no indication of alcoholism noted by a medical professional before issue , or no DUI 's or court treatment were ordered for alcoholic tendencies before the policy went into effect , then alcoholism will not void a life insurance policy . Developing cancer or any other risk factor AFTER a life insurance policy is in effect can not void your life insurance if that risk was not involved at the time the policy was put into effect .
Alcoholism can be an issue with purchasing life insurance . It can lead to rated up premiums all the way to an outright decline of life insurance . There needs to be a record establishing alcoholism . A medical history of treatments or rehabilitation . An arrest record including but not limited to one or more DUIs . Be careful with self diagnosis . Just because you have a headache does n't necessarily mean you have a brain tumor . You can be a heavy drinker and not be diagnosed as an alcoholic . Alcoholism needs to be a documented problem either medically or lawfully . Always be careful with self diagnosis .
If you are a recovering alcoholic who has abstained from alcohol for a number of years , you can get life insurance at a competitive rate with persons who are not alcoholics . If you have been through treatment one or more times and are drinking now , you will probably need to purchase a simplified or guaranteed issue policy .
If you are trying to get a life insurance policy while an alcoholic , it can be done . The price and type of policy you get will depend on the following : 1 -RRB- Whether you are still drinking ; 2 -RRB- whether you have been to treatment ; 3 -RRB- if so , how many times ; 4 -RRB- if so , when was the the last time ; 5 -RRB- do you attend AA or other support groups ; 6 -RRB- do you have any DUI 's or reckless driving charges ; 7 -RRB- is your drivers license suspended ; 8 -RRB- have you been able to hold down a job or show other signs of stability ; 9 -RRB- do you have major health problems associated with your alcoholism ; and 10 -RRB- do you use other drugs . The worst case scenario is that you will need to take a graded policy . The best case scenario is that you have been sober long enough that being an alcoholic will not affect your policy rates too much .
A recovering alcoholic may get life insurance . It depends on how long you have been in recovery . Each company has its own guidelines regarding this issue . For example one company may require no alcohol abuse in the past two years where another company may require five or more years . Another thing to consider is whether the alcohol abuse has caused any health issues like liver damage or kidney disease . All these factors will be considered by an insurance underwriter prior to approving an application for life insurance .
It 's important to note that some carriers will decline a person because of their alcoholism , but if that does happen to you , ask your agent to get a reconsideration period in writing . An underwriter can usually advise that if the client has clean records for two years or so , they are eligible again . AND some companies , like Lloyds of London , have alcohol abuse built into the policy as an exclusion , so they 're more lenient when it comes to writing someone with past alcohol abuse .
A DUI can affect life insurance rates , or even cause a decline . But if the DUI happened years ago , it may not affect your rate at all . The key factor with a DUI is how long ago it occurred ; whether there was more than one DUI ; and , if alcohol treatment was ordered , whether you continue to drink alcohol . One DUI over 5 years ago will affect rates far less than repeat DUI 's within a few years , especially if alcohol abuse/addiction is present .
Elevated liver function test results from the life insurance exam will cause underwriters to look for the cause of the abnormal lab results . In doing so , they may do additional testing , order medical records , and/or request that the applicant fill out an alcohol questionnaire . Mild to moderate alcohol use is not generally a problem , unless you have a health condition that requires that you not drink . But excessive alcohol use , as indicated through liver function , can indeed cause higher ratings or declines .
Being an alcoholic does n't prohibit you from obtaining life insurance . Alcoholism is accepted as a disease and if controlled it really does n't impact you . Certainly it poses some degree of risk and that would be considered in the underwriting process . There may well be a rating applied and thus a higher premium required than for a person who is not an alcoholic and has all other conditions the same , but insurance is obtainable .
Life insurance policies are rarely voided . There is a specified period , normally two years , during which the company can deny a death claim if it is determined that the applicant made false representations on the application . I chose the word representation deliberately . An applicant is only bound by their personal knowledge and is therefore not responsible for any diagnosis made after the application is taken . The answers to questions are based upon the knowledge of the applicant not the actual state of affairs . One of the symptoms of alcoholism is denial and if the applicant does not believe themselves to be an alcoholic and no medical professional has diagnosed them as being an alcoholic , the insurance company would be hard pressed to ever deny a claim in the first two years . After the first two years pass the company can not deny a claim .
I can give you some examples from cases I have handled . I think you will be surprised . Many people assume they will not qualify for life insurance , and happily , they are wrong . It takes a lot . One fellow needed to purchase several million dollars of life insurance to cover a bank loan for his business . His business was a bar/restaurant . The night before his insurance exam , a few of his buddies came by to socialize a bit . They did cocaine . Of course , he tested positive . No insurance for him . He probably would have qualified for a guaranteed-issue burial policy . But the $ 25,000 would not have done him any good . He needed that bank loan . And he needed life insurance to get it . And you know what ? He didnt get the life insurance , and he didnt get the bank loan . He would have had to wait a few years before he became eligible again . Five years is the industry standard , but I probably couldve gotten it for him sooner . Another candidate also a business owner went to rehab for both drug and alcohol addiction . Unfortunately , he didnt schedule the necessary follow-ups after his treatment . Carriers were worried that a relapse would be right around the corner without the proper support system in place . He will also have to wait a year or two . Then you have people who have a number of serious illnesses that just arent sufficiently controlled . The combination of obesity , heart condition , diabetes , smoking etc. is wicked . Ive had people come to me with these factors in place , and then some . Has to be some measure of control . Otherwise , you look like a walking timebomb . These cases are extreme . Other cases seem scary but can be quite placeable . Pot smoking ? You can get a policy . Bankruptcy ? You can get a policy . On probation for a felony ? You can get a policy . Suspended drivers license ? You can get a policy . Travel to India , or South America , or rural China ? You can get a policy . Mountain climber ? You can get a policy . Deep water scuba diver ? You can get a policy . Of course , a number of important factors need to be in place , but on the overall , it can be done . Surprise !
It does not have to . It all depends on how the broker sets the context for the use of the medication . Let me give you an example . A number of years ago , a woman called me asking the exact same question . Would she be eligible for life insurance coverage now since she does take antidepressants ? This is where the broker has to delve into the personal history of the potential applicant . You have to be thorough , but you also have to tread delicately because you will be addressing sensitive personal issues . We talked a bit about her current medication program : what were the drugs , what were the dosages , when was the diagnosis , etc. . I learned about her prior history of basically self-medicating with drugs and alcohol . Very important to know , and very important to put in the proper context . In talking further , I found out about some particularly troublesome childhood experiences . She actually was a survivor of childhood abuse . This info was integral to the overall picture that was developing . Through connecting the dots , a clear and also positive life story emerged . Here was a person who had suffered severe trauma . Quite naturally , she became depressed in surviving it . Before she was able to seek professional help , she tried to treat the symptoms herself with drugs and alcohol . Not the right way to do it , but at least she was cognitive of trouble brewing internally . Eventually she fought her way through her addictions and got herself into the hands of psychiatric professionals . They gave her the therapy and medication she needed to keep her demons at bay . She became stable , compliant with treatment , and drug and alcohol free . And eligible for life insurance at a very reasonable rate . All because the current use of antidepressants was put in the context of her life history .
There appears to be a wave of reconsideration of marijuana laws across the U.S. . In most cases this is in the area of medical marijuana , but many states are also taking a fresh look at recreational marijuana laws . If you truly are only a recreational user with no other factors you should have no problem getting life insurance . If you have any treatment for addiction -LRB- alcohol or drugs -RRB- , a DUI or other drug / alcohol legal problem you will have less options . Marijuana is a topic that the industry is watching closely . It is likely that underwriting guidelines will evolve in coming years , so no matter what rate you get today it would be wise to keep in touch with your agent . There is a chance that over the next few years marijuana usage will have less of an impact on your life insurance premium .
Our agency and others who cater to `` impaired risk '' life insurance are the best resource for finding life insurance as a recovering alcoholic . By having a number of policies to shop from , you can find one that that will give you the lowest price at this point in your sobriety . Agencies like ours carry policies that are for those who have had treatment in the past year , with a lower price for those who have been out of treatment at least two years , and so on . After 10 years , most recovering alcoholics who have stayed sober during that entire time will have no problem getting a life insurance policy anywhere .
A DUI will affect life insurance if within a certain number of years of applying for the policy . With simplified issue plans -LRB- those that do not require an exam , and usually do not require medical records -RRB- , you may be approved as quickly as two years after the DUI , although some carriers will make you wait 10 years after the DUI to get that type of coverage . If applying for a medically underwritten policy , the rate will vary depending on how many years from the DUI it has been . Underwriters also consider whether you had treatment for alcohol abuse in conjunction with the DUI , whether there were repeat offenses , if you still drink alcohol , etc. . In the worst case scenario of recent DUI , repeat DUI 's , repeat treatments , still drinking , there is guaranteed issue life insurance for those who fit the age guidelines . To get your best price for life insurance after a DUI , it is a good idea to use a broker who can shop the many policies out there and find you the best price .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is It Worth Buying Long Term Care Insurance ?
Like any insurance . If you need it , it 's worth the price and then some . If you do n't then most feel that it is not . The thing with long term care insurance is that the older you get the more likely you are to need the coverage . Much life life insurance though this type of coverage typically goes up in cost with each birthday that you pass .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Long term care insurance is not worth the cost if it causes you to cut back on groceries or medication or other essentials needed for a healthy and happy life . If you have very little savings , assets or investments , long term care insurance may also not be worth the cost . If you can afford it , you might want to buy long term care insurance for the options it offers you for your care . However , you would not need it to protect your assets if you do not have assets to protect . Long term care insurance IS worth the cost for those who have a lot to lose if they would have to pay expensive nursing home , assisted living , in home , or other care costs for an extended period of time . It also is worth the cost for those who have strong feelings about being able to pay for the type of care they want , rather than rely on where Medicaid allows .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Long Term Health Insurance -LRB- known as Long Term Care Insurance -RRB- is worth it for some people and not for others . If you have a large amount of savings , investments , and/or property , Long Term Care Insurance can protect your estate by paying for the cost of caring for you if you can not care for yourself . If you have very little in the way of assets , LTCI may not be worth it , as Medicaid would cover the cost of staying in a nursing home . However , whether you have a large estate or not , Long Term Care Insurance does provide some freedom in choosing where you receive your care . And for some people that is worth the price of the insurance .
Long-term care is worth it when 1 . A person is capable of affording to pay the premium for at least a base policy . There is no sense buying a long-term care policy only to have to let it go later because one can not afford it anymore . 2 . Assets that are targeted for moving to the next generation need protection against the high cost ofprolonged end-of-life care . 3 . There is a family history of dementia or Alzheimer 's disease , or other debilitating ailment that might be genetically transmitted . 4 . One does not want to be a financial , emotional , or psychological burden to their spouse or adult children . 5 . Quality of care is an issue . 6 . Staying at home for as long as possible if one becomes chronically ill instead of having to go into a care facility is important . 7 . Adult children are willing to pay premiums for a long-term care policy for their parents . Probability statistics are not entirely reliable because we really do n't know what new medical procedures or accommodations may come along in the future that would change the current situation regarding long-term care . But , the best guess I 've seen justified is that about 1 in 6 will need about 2 years of care to perform daily activities before they die . The cost for that in todays dollars depends on where one lives and how long family members can last taking care of a seriously disabled elderly person before they need skilled help .
Whether Long Term Care Insurance is worth the investment depends on how many assets you have to protect . For those who do not have very large estates and who are struggling to make ends meet from month to month , buying Long Term Care Insurance may not make much sense . On the other hand , those who have assets of hundreds of thousands of dollars may find paying a couple hundred of dollars a month for a Long Term Care insurance policy as a good investment . If extended care was needed , their policy would pay for it so that their assets would be safe . The policy would also given them more choices for their care , which some would consider worth the money .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
People who have very few assets and/or income should probably not get long term care insurance . If there are immediate needs that will go unmet because you are concerned about a possible long term care stay in the future , then the cost of long term care insurance may not be worth it . Also , if you may perhaps go on Medicaid in the future , even without needing long term care services , you should not purchase long term care insurance , in most situations .
Is long term care insurance worth buying ? The answers going to depend on the individual and what they need rather than a blanket answer . What Long Term Care insurance does is create money on demand to pay for services . The value of the insurance is based on the desire not to liquidate other assets to pay for services . You do n't have to buy LTC coverage , but if you have anything of value , it sure is worth the thought .
Is long term care worth the price ? That really is up to the individual . I guess those who go through the steps to purchase long term care feel it is worth both the time and money to own . Long term care is n't for everybody , but it is for those who want some control over the care they receive in the later stages of their life .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Insurance ... . be it Disability Insurance or Long Term Care Insurance or Life Insurance or whatever type of insurance that you buy ... . is not really worth the money put into it unless you need it . But if you do need it , it is beyond worth it . Also , the peace of mind that having insurance gives has a value . So Aflac Disability Insurance is worth it if you become disabled . And if you do n't , it may be worth it to you to not have had to worry about the possibility of being without an income for any significant length of time .
Long Term Care Insurance is not an investment at all . It is a morbidity insurance product to fund long term care expenses , generally a defensive planning tactic during retirement . If the question is along the lines of : Is long term care insurance money worth spending , then the answer is yes . If you dont have long term care , then your investments will be at risk to the expenditures of extended care during your senior years .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
end question
start question
annuities
Who Has Best Annuities ?
Who the best Annuity Company is depends on a few different things . Mostly the current annuity market and who currently has the most competitive rates . It also depends on your personal situation and needs and which company offers a product that fits those needs best . In other words , there is no best annuity company , it just depends . But it is important to use a company that has good financial ratings , and `` A '' or better is usually considered a good rating . So whichever well rated company offers the most competitive product that fits your needs , is the best company .
There are many companies that have different plan and coverages for annuities . Many have different mechanisms to fit the best policy and plan customarily . It is best to contact a consultant in order to find the best policy for . We need to further analyze your situation and draw up a plan . Moreover , find another of the best investment coverages for you .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
You can purchase an Annuity from a few different sources . However the best way is to use an independent insurance agent who specializes in annuities . An independent agent can shop the market and all the different companies/products to give you the best annuity for your situation . You can also get annuities from captive insurance agents who work only for one company . They are limited -LRB- or highly encouraged -RRB- to just sell annuities from that one company . And since annuity rates are constantly changing and no one company has the best rates for all types of products , some consumers see this as a disadvantage . Some banks provide annuities , however their selection is often limited . Financial Advisors sometimes sell annuities as well as some stock brokers ; however , they usual stick to mainly variable annuities that are directly invested in the stock market . You can find an independent annuity expert online via a web search for them in your area . Or at various websites such as WEBSITELINK
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Who the best Annuity Company is depends on a few different things . Mostly the current annuity market and who currently has the most competitive rates . It also depends on your personal situation and needs and which company offers a product that fits those needs best . In other words , there is no best annuity company , it just depends . But it is important to use a company that has good financial ratings , and `` A '' or better is usually considered a good rating . So whichever well rated company offers the most competitive product that fits your needs , is the best company .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Suze has modified her disdain over annuities , more specifically variable annuities with income riders , but overall has been punitive on annuities . Most entertainers are taking their cues from show sponsors who have a disposition against annuities , sometimes from misinformation , or just plain ignorance . Annuities are not for everyone . But for those clients , who qualify under its product suitability goals and provisional features , annuities can be an integrated part of a retirement plan .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
What are deferred annuities best suited for ? The challenge with this question is that the term deferred annuity has at least two `` definitions '' . I will describe two scenarios and if your question is not answered , please do not hesitate to contact me . A deferred annuity can refer to exchanging a lump sum for a guaranteed income at a point in the future . In this situation , a deferred annuity would be suited for someone who wanted a guaranteed flow of income with no management responsibilities . A life annuity may or may not include a guaranteed payout . There are different options , so ask your insurance agent for details . In addition to the income amount , taxation during the the deferral period and of the income flow should be considered . In Canada , a deferred annuity can also refer to Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- and Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- . Both of these are issued by insurance companies and offer the option of an annuity in the future . Since they are issued by insurance companies , they also offer guarantees not offered by other institutions for non-registered investments . These include potential creditor protection and estate planning opportunities , such as bypassing probate . Segregated funds are similar to mutual funds , but they offer maturity and death guarantees . In addition , some segregated funds include the `` locking in '' of gains . Depending on your individual situation , there could also be some tax advantages to these plans . These type of deferred annuities are best suited for individuals who are looking for , and would benefit from , the additional features and guarantees . This is an overview of a potentially complex subject . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me .
It is best to find an independent agent who specializes in annuities . They can help you sort through the hundreds of annuity products out there , and show you a comparison of products well suited for your situation . It is important to use an independent agent who will show you multiple companies . If you go to a specific insurance company , all they will show you are annuities from their company . An independent agent can show you annuities from all of the companies out there . As a consumer , be sure to try your best to have a set of defined goals you can go over with the agent . This will help them find suitable products to show you . You can also do your own homework on the internet . There are many different sites out there that will show annuity comparisons . But as I eluded to before , it is easy to get bogged down in all the info for hundreds of annuities . Some sites try to help by showing what they consider `` consumer friendly '' annuities , such as WEBSITELINK
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
Anyone can use an annuity . If you 're asking who is most likely to benefit most from an annuity that answer would be anyone who needs a stable , predictable , and reliable income stream . Another type of person who benefits from owning an annuity is anyone who believes they will live a long time as annuities can provide income that lasts for ones lifetime even if the income stream is more than the initial money in the annuity .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Do You Cancel Aviva Life Insurance ?
Yes , you can cancel Aviva life insurance . Call Aviva at1 .800.800.9882 or send them a secure email at their website : WEBSITELINK . You might want to talk this over with your agent beforehand , to make sure that cancelling the policy is in your best interest .
How about why not Aviva ... Aviva sold their US portfolio to Athene . This means that Aviva no longer does business in the US and all previous Aviva policyholders are now Athene clients . If you currently have a policy with Aviva and there is anything specific I can help you with please do n't hesitate to ask . I have clients that were with Aviva and are now with Athene .
Yes , you can cancel Aviva life insurance . Call Aviva at1 .800.800.9882 or send them a secure email at their website : WEBSITELINK . You might want to talk this over with your agent beforehand , to make sure that cancelling the policy is in your best interest .
You can cancel your Aviva life insurance policy by calling their customer service number , 800-800-9882 . When you call , ask if there are any other options for your policy besides cancelling it . You may be able to save some premium by reducing the face amount , or quit paying premiums but still retain some of the death benefit by turning into a reduced paid up policy .
In 2007 , Aviva India signed on Sachin Tendulkar as its brand ambassador . The company named a children 's life insurance policy `` Aviva Little Master '' in honor of the beloved cricketer . Aviva India is also offering some scholarships to children , and a chance to play cricket with Sachin Tendulkar , as part of its ventures with its brand ambassador .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Aviva Life & Annuity Company has a New York and Iowa Company . The Iowa Company is 1.67 billion in assets with a total surplus & Asset Valuation Reserve of 85.3 million . Aviva Life & Annuity Company is rated by A.M. Best A - -LRB- 4 -RRB- , Standard & Poors A - -LRB- 7 -RRB- and Comdex 62 .
Usually , most policies require a quick medical exam , which includes a urine sample . And they will test for pot . The good news is that most companies will not decline you coverage . They will just consider you a `` Smoker '' and give you smoker rates . But , currently , I know of 3 companies that offer `` Non-Smoker '' rates to pot smokers . Aviva is the most relaxed about it . And will allow up to a `` Preferred '' non-smoker rating for using 2 times per week or less . Lincoln National is next and will give Standard Non-Smoker ratings to people who smoke 2 times per week or less . MetLife allows for 1 time per week and will offer a Standard nonsmoker rating . Prudential allows for 2 times per month , and offers a Standard nonsmoker rating . Long story short if you smoke Pot , Aviva or Lincoln National will be your best bets . And this list is as of 3/2013 , it could easily change .
Natwest Life Insurance is provided by Aviva Life & Pensions UL Limited . Natwest itself was acquire by RBC -LRB- the Royal Bank of Scotland Group -RRB- in the year 2000 . Natwest offers offer level term life insurance , decreasing term life insurance , and over 50 's whole life insurance policies for those between ages 50 and 75 .
Here are a few of the 30 year guaranteed term life insurance companies : American General , American National , Ameritas , Aviva , Banner , Lincoln Benefit , Lincoln National , MetLife Investors , Nationwide , Principal , Protective , Pruco , Savings Bank , Security MTlNY , Transmerica , United Omaha . There are other companies who have guaranteed universal life that can be configured to perform like a 30 year term life insurance . Keep in mind that there are age limitations to 30 year guaranteed term life insurance .
Stonebridge Life Insurance company is a smaller insurance company compared to the those like Transamerica , American General , Aviva Life and Assurity . That said , this does not mean Stonebridge is bad . In fact some of the life products fit very well meeting the needs some people have . Their rates are competitive and underwriting is as good as the bigger companies .
Many reputable insurers offer top-rated annuity contracts . Allianz , New York Life and AVIVA are three of the leading writers of annuities . Both fixed and variable contracts are available and you should always work with an experienced full-time financial planner or broker . Do not take advice from someone that is unlicensed , part-time , a radio/TV media person or simply someone that you feel does not have the experience to explain your best options .
Geico themselves does not offer life insurance policies - the coverage programs secured through the Geico agency are written through non-affiliated insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Genworth , Aviva , Transamerica , MetLife , etc. -RRB- . If you try to run a quote on Geico 's website , you are re-directed to another quoting site that Geico does not own . There 's numerous insurance companies out there . I would recommend working with an independent agent so you can see a wider range of options that are available to you . If you have any other questions or would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Aviva Life & Annuity Companyis rated by A.M. Best A - -LRB- 4 -RRB- Standard & Poors A - -LRB- 7 -RRB- and Comdex 62 .
Aviva Life and Annuity Company is based in Des Moines , Iowa . They were the the number one ranked life insurance company for sales of indexed life insurance products in the third quarter of 2012 . In addition to indexed universal life , the company also offers term life and universal life insurance .
There are several life insurance companies that issue to age 90 . Here are just some of the bigger players : American General , Aviva , AXA , Genworth , ING , John Hancock , Lincoln Benefit Life , MetLife , Minnesota Life , New York Life , Principle National , Prudential , security Mutual of NY and Transamerica . Not all products issue to age 90 , but the list identifies at least one product .
You have significant power to walk away from any insurer . Most states operate with regulations regarding how a cancellation in mid term is treated . Before you leap to canceling your Progressive policy , check with the Insurance department in your state . They will know whether there is a requirement to pro rate the premium or not . Pro rated cancellations are the norm and this is how that works . If you cancel an annual policy for which you paid the whole premium and you cancel at exactly six months , then the company will return to you 50 % of the premium . So , just make sure what the cancellation requirements are in your state .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
Certainly , but you do not want this situation as most policies contain a ` other insurance ' clause in them and this could create problems you do not need in the event of a loss/claim occurringin the ` overlap ' period . Follow the cancellation procedures outlined in the policy you desire to cancel and have no gap between the cancelled policy and the replacement policy . DO NOT RELY ON A NEW BROKER OR AGENT TO CANCEL YOUR EXISTING POLICY WITHOUT GETTING DOCUMENTATION IN WRITING THEY ARE SENDING APPROPRIATE CANCELLATION DOCUMENTS AND EVIDENCE TO YOUR CURRENT CARRIER . Remember , the contract is between you and your current carrier and only you -LRB- the named insured -RRB- can request cancellation of your policy . Also be aware that ` auto pay ' or ` EFT ' payment modes on an existing policy may not be terminated immediately and your account may be ` swept ' for a premium due within the next 21 to 30 days . Make sure your auto pay or EFT plan is terminated asap -LRB- and get evidence -RRB- when your policy is cancelled .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is Car Insurance Group N ?
Car insurance group N is a rating for vehicles in Britain . It typically is referring to a car that is fairly high-performance and probably expensive to insure . Here in the US , we use -LRB- almost all carriers -RRB- different types of rating . Symbols are often assigned to the vehicle you are insuring , which is one factor that helps determine the rate .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
Medigap Plan N is one of ten standardized plans offers coverage in addition to the standard benefits provided by other Medicare Supplement plans . It is most simiiar to Medigap Plan D , with two major exceptions . With N , you are responsible for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to a $ 50 copayment for emergency room visits that do n't result in inpatient admission before your Part B coverage being paying expenses at 100 % . Basic benefits offered by Plan N include : Medicare Part A hospital coinsurance and other costs up to an additional 365 days after Original Medicare benefits are exhausted Medicare Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayments -LRB- except for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to a $ 50 copayment for emergency room visits that do not result in inpatient care -RRB- First three pints of blood used in a medical procedure Plan N also offers the following additional benefits : Skilled Nursing Facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign travel emergency care -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- When available , many consumers find they can save $ 50 per month or more when compared to the more popular Plan F . If your doctor accepts Medicare assignment as payment in full , and you do not see your physician more than twice per month , Plan N can be a great way to lower your overall health care expenses .
Medicare Supplement Plan N is a standardized Medigap Plan . Every insurance company who sells Plan N offers the same exact benefits . The only difference is the price . Plan N covers the following : 100 % of the Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . 100 % of Medicare Part B coinsurance , except for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 copay for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted -RRB- . 100 % First 3 pints of Blood 100 % Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 100 % Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 100 % of Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- Deductible 80 % to a lifetime max benefit of $ 50,000 for Foreign Travel emergency . Plan N does not cover : The annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Part B Excess Charges -LRB- Above the Medicare Approved Amount -RRB- If you have any other questions about Plan N or other Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 or visit www.remedigap.com .
Medicare supplement plan N covers the same things as Medigap plans F and G , but with a different level of benefits . Medicare supplement plan N acts to fill the `` gaps '' in Medicare Part A and Part B. Plan N pays your Part A deductible and coinsurance . Plan N pays a portion of your Part B expenses above the deductible but requires you to pay a copay for outpatient services and ER visits .
Car insurance group N is a rating for vehicles in Britain . It typically is referring to a car that is fairly high-performance and probably expensive to insure . Here in the US , we use -LRB- almost all carriers -RRB- different types of rating . Symbols are often assigned to the vehicle you are insuring , which is one factor that helps determine the rate .
I assume you mean Medicare plan N . It is very confusing . With Medicare Parts and Medicare plans . Medicare supplement plan N is a Medigap plan designed to pay Medicare approved claims that are not paid by Medicare due to deductibles and coinsurance . Plan N pays your Part A deductible but does not cover your Part B deductible and requires a copay for outpatient services .
There is one major difference from plan D and N. Plan N has a $ 20 Copay when you go to the doctors office and a $ 50 Copay when you go to the emergency room . Plan N would be better suited for someone that has more office visits in a year .
The best Medicare Supplement Plans in my opinion are Plans G and N. With Plan G you only have one small deductible to meet -LRB- $ 166 -RRB- and there are no copays for a doctor office visit . Rates are very competitive with Plan G among insurance today companies today . Plan N can save you money on your monthly premium if you are comfortable paying a small co-pay of $ 20 for some doctor office visits . There is a $ 50 co-pay for an Emergency Room visit that does not result in an inpatient hospital admission . Plan N has one of the lowest premiums of any of the Medicare Supplements that offer comprehensive coverage for the gaps in your Medicare Part A & B coverage .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
To add to what 's above , the different lettered plans are A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N . There is also what 's known as a high-deductible plan F which features the same benefits as a regular plan F - the different is you 're taking on a deductible -LRB- $ 2,140 in 2014 -RRB- to get lower premiums . Plan N can be very competitive to plans F and G .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans -LRB- A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N -RRB- . Plans E , H , I and J are no longer available to purchase . In some states , you may be able to buy a Medigap SELECT policy or a High-Deductible Plan F . The SELECT plans requires you to use specific hospitals . The deductible for High-Deductible Plan F is $ 2,140 in 2014 . Plans F , G , and N are widely sold by most Medicare Supplement insurance companies . They are popular with Medicare beneficiaries for various reasons . Plan F covers all Medicare approved charges . You are not responsible for paying any deductibles , co-pays or excess charges . Plan G is covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 . You have all the same benefits of Plan F after meeting the small deductible . Plan N covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 . You also have co-pays that are never more than $ 20 to any doctor/specialist who accepts Medicare . If you have more questions about Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans available to Medicare Beneficiaries . They include Plan A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N with Plan F also offering a high-deductible plan . The most popular standardized Medigap Plans are F , G , and N. Plan F will cover all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , co-insurance or deductibles for Medicare covered costs . If you choose the high-deductible Plan F , you must pay for Medicare covered costs up to the deductible amount of $ 2,140 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- before your Medigap Plan F will pay anything . Plan G will cover all your Medicare approved charges after you have satisfied the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Once the small deductible is met , Medigap Plan G acts like Plan F and covers the co-pays , co-insurance and deductibles that Original Medicare does not cover . Plan N covers 100 % of the Part B co-insurance , except for a small co-pay for some office visits -LRB- never more than $ 20 per visit -RRB- and up to a co-pay of $ 50 for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted as an inpatient -RRB- . You are also responsible for satisfying the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . If you have further questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
The cost of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also commonly known as a Medigap plan -RRB- can vary widely around the country . The premiums for a person 's plan are based on a number of factors including the type of plan he/she is applying for -LRB- A , B , C , D , F , Hi-F , G , K , L , M , N , or a SELECT plan -RRB- , their zip code -LRB- where you live is a critical factor -RRB- , whether you use tobacco products , if you 're male or female , and your medical history -LRB- if subject to medical underwriting - not applicable if applying during initial open enrollment period or if you have a guaranteed-issue right -RRB- . If you 're subject to medical underwriting , you may be subject to a level 1 or level 2 rate for many carriers . Plan F is the most popular Medicare supplement that people buy . In general , you can expect plans F and G to be the most expensive in your area because they provide the most comprehensive benefits . Plan N can be very competitive with F and G -LRB- plan N is a great option for those who 's doctors accept assignment -RRB- . For quotes to determine cost for your specific coverage , send me an e-mail with your contact information and I can provide the quotes accordingly . You can also reach me by phone as well - my contact information is on my profile page . Thanks very much !
Your auto insurance will often extend to a vehicle you rent , depending on the specific circumstances . If the rental is replacing your car because of repair , vs , a car n vacation , the situation may be different . It 's best to determine the state you are in , the company you are with , and why you are renting a car to determine exact coverage . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites .
I am asked this questions almost daily . Finding the best plan for you depends on your current state of health , medicines you are taking , height and weight , if you are a smoker , and what type of exposure you would like to take or minimize . There are usually over 25 different insurance companies offering coverage in each state . Each of those companies offer multiple plans -LRB- F , G , N , D -RRB- . For some of my clients , Plan F is best for them . Others find Plan N works better . It is really a personal preference and can only be determined by talking with an experienced broker who represents multiple companies .
No . It 's useless to have 2 medigap plans anyway as the coverage would become redundant - you would be paying extra money for no additional benefit as the carrier would n't be able to pay extra above and beyond what 's stated in the policy . E.g. -LRB- under the assumption that you could have 2 Medigap plans -RRB- if you have a plan F and a plan N , the plan F already covers everything at 100 % making the benefits under a plan N moot and would n't pay anything out . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Anyone who is 65 or older and has Medicare Part A and Part B , also known as Original Medicare . Original Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of your healthcare . A Medigap plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medicare supplement plan -RRB- is designed to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- the other 20 % -RRB- . There are 10 plans - A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Plans F is the most comprehensive plan , but is generally also the most expensive plan - plans G and N provide very similar benefits but at a lower cost and can be much more suitable to certain individuals . If you 're trying to keep your premiums to a much lower level , there 's also what 's called a `` high-deductible '' plan F that provides the same benefits as the regular plan F , but requires a deductible to be paid first -LRB- $ 2,140 in 2014 -RRB- .
Working with an independent insurance agent and one who specializes in Medicare Supplements is a great way to help you find the Medigap policy that meets your needs . Why ? Independent agents are not employees of the insurance company . We work for you and do not charge a fee for our service . We are always looking for companies that will benefit our clients . We know that one size does not fit all . Every individual is unique with their health qualifications , how much premium they can afford , andwhat benefits they desire . You benefit because an independent agent can shop the Medicare Supplement insurance market and show you what is available in your area . If you like to do everything on your own , keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . While contacting the insurance company directly may seem more convenient , you are often times paying a higher premium . I 've worked with many Seniors who initially bought a Medigap Plan directly with the insurance company . After realizing their Plan F , G , or N was the same exact Plan F , G , or N with another insurance company , they were happy to let me shop the market and find them a lower premium . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . 1-888-411-1329 .
Original Medicare has deductibles and coinsurance for Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have a Medicare supplement plan N , you will have copay 's for outpatient expenses and ER visits . Plan N copay 's are limited to $ 20 or $ 50 . If you have a Medicare Advantage plan you will have copay 's for most medical services .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Medigap Supplemental Insurance ?
Medigap or Medicare Supplement insurance is private health insurance established to help supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B. Meaning , it will help pay some of the health care costs not covered by Original Medicare -LRB- co-pays , deductibles , co-insurance -RRB- . When you have a Medigap Policy , Medicare will pay it 's share of Medicare approved amounts for your covered health care costs . Then your Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- pays its share . There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans -LRB- A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N -RRB- with varying benefits . Plan F is the most popular because it covers all Medicare approved charges and you do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you 've satisfied the small annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . WEBSITELINK Please feel free to contact me regarding your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with Medigap benefit and quote information to help you make an informed decision .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
Medigap insurance is the same thing a a Medicare supplement . This form of insurance is designed to `` supplement the gaps '' in coverage of original Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- . `` Supplemental '' insurance is a term used however for any insurance that supplements , i.e. completes or enhances , some other insurance coverage . For example , a hospital indemnity or short term care insurance policy is also `` supplemental '' to Medicare insurance , however not the same as Medigap . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent experienced in Medicare and supplemental health plans to assess your needs and objectives and provide optimal solutions for you in this area .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
Medigap and Part C are not the same . Medigap is supplemental coverage to your Original Medicare Part A and B . You do n't have to buy a Medigap Plan , it is optional . Many people , however , use the Medigap Policy to help cover the 20 % of Medicare approved costs not covered by Part A and B. Medicare Supplement insurance is private insurance in which you pay a premium every month . You are allowed to visit any provider who accepts Medicare . Part C is called a Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO , so you are restricted to using network doctors . This type of Plan combines Part A , Part B , and usually Part D -LRB- drug coverage -RRB- . It 's important to note , if you join a Medicare Advantage Plan , you do n't need and ca n't be sold a Medigap Policy . In other words , you ca n't buy a Medigap Policy to supplement your Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
You can change your Medigap Plan at any point throughout the year . You do not have to wait for AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period from Oct. 15 - Dec 7 -RRB- . The Annual Election Period only applies to Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug Plans . You 'll have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan if you are not in your Open Enrollment Period or other Guaranteed Issue situation . To medically qualify , you have to answer health questions on the insurance application and then get approved through the medical underwriting department . It is best to contact Medicare or an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to see if you are still in Open Enrollment or a Guaranteed Issue situation . If you have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan , an independent agent can review your health history and help determine which insurance companies are best suited for your situation . There are several reasons why you may want to change your Medigap plan -LRB- lower premium , more benefits , less benefits -RRB- . The main reason people want to change is usually because of price . Over time , premiums increase and what you may be paying for Plan F may be very different from your neighbor . Although Medigap plan benefits are standardized , the price is not . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can provide quotes for your Medigap Plan so you can compare it to what you 're currently paying . Please feel free to read this article which gives a little more detail about changing your Medigap insurance . WEBSITELINK Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you with your specific situation .
Nothing . Medigap and Medicare Supplement Insurance mean the same thing . Two different terms that describe the same product . A Medigap Plan -LRB- or Medicare Supplement Insurance -RRB- is designed to cover what original Medicare Part A & B does not . Medicare along with a Medigap Plan/Medicare Supplement is great health insurance . There is no network so you can go to any doctor or hospital you want . If they take Medicare they will take the supplement . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
If you want to help fill in the gaps that Original Medicare does n't cover , then you should consider buying Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance . A Medigap Policy can help pay your share of Medicare-covered services -LRB- the co-insurance , co-pays and deductibles -RRB- . Generally , Original Medicare Part A and B only cover 80 % percent of your health care costs , leaving you with the remaining 20 % to pay out of your pocket -- unless you have a Medigap Plan . If you have a significant health issue arise , twenty percent can get hit your budget pretty hard . A $ 3,000 procedure will cost you $ 600 in co-insurance . A $ 10,000 procedure will cost you $ 1,000 . Surgery costing $ 100,000 will leave you with a hefty $ 20,000 bill . Some people believe they should wait until their health dictates a need for Medigap insurance . Unfortunately , waiting is not the best option as you may not qualify for Medigap insurance once you `` need '' it . Medigap insurance companies are not bound to the Affordable Care Act , so they can ask health questions -LRB- unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation or your initial Open Enrollment period -RRB- . Your Medigap application will have to be approved through the medical underwriting department . To find out if you are in your initial Open Enrollment or a Guaranteed Issue situation , you can work with an agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance or call Medicare directly . If you do qualify , you 'll be able to buy a Medigap Plan in your state and not be required to answer any health questions . If I can assist you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Medigap or Medicare Supplement insurance coverage is offered by private insurance companies . All Medigap Plans are standardized , so the benefits with Plan F from ABC insurance company are the same exact benefits with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . Often times , Seniors are only aware of a few insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans . This is because of their heavy marketing techniques . In reality , there are many more insurance companies available and probably most of them you 've never heard of -- but since Medigap Plan benefits are standardized by CMS , it does n't matter what the name of the insurance company is . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can share which insurance companies are in your area and which ones have the best price . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you find Medigap coverage in your area .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover A Nursing Home ?
Medicare coverage for Nursing Home is limited to Skilled Care for 100 days after a qualifying hospital stay of 3 days not counting day of discharge . Medicare was never designed for long term nursing home stays . To qualify as skilled care the patient must have been admitted to the nursing home for the same issue he was in the hospital , he must be able to improve with therapy , and the stay must be approved by Medicare .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Medicare pays for the first 20 days of a * qualified stay in the nursing home , and then it will pay all but $ 152/day to day 100 . After day 100 , the only nursing home care that is paid is what would have been paid if the recipient is not in the nursing home . I.e. Drugs and durable medical equipment , doctor visits , hospital stays , and other qualified products and services . * To be a qualified stay , the patient must have been in the hospital for at least three days for the same condition for which they are going to the nursing home . The health condition must be medically determined to need skilled nursing care from a Medicare approved facility . Without these qualifiers , Medicare will not pay any part of the nursing home care , except that which they would have received if they not in a nursing home .
Medicare can provide some limited skilled nursing home care benefits . For days 1-20 , you pay $ 0 each benefit period . For days 21-100 , you pay $ 152 per day each benefit period . Days 101 + , you 're responsible for all costs . So , in short , Medicare will provide coverage for nursing care for up to 100 days . Medicaid can help pay nursing home expenses for Medicare beneficiaries . Medicare.gov provides a list of each specific covered service and eligibility conditions that need to be met for Medicare to cover nursing home care expenses . Long term care insurance is going to provide the greatest nursing home benefits .
Medicare Part A is , in short , your hospital insurance . It covers inpatient hospital care , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hopsice care , and home health services . Please note , there are limitations to what Medicare pays and for how long it will pay for given services . If you want to have adequate coverage for long-term care types of services -LRB- e.g. nursing home care , hospice care , and home services -RRB- , you will want to supplement your Medicare coverage with a separate long-term care policy . Medicare Part B is , in short , your physician insurance . This part of Medicare covers things like doctor visits , lab tests , surgeries , ambulance services , durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- , and other outpatient services . Medicare Part A & Part B are commonly referred to as Original Medicare and only covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of expenses . While 20 % does n't seem like it 's going to have a high dollar figure , the bill can add up quite fast . The idea of a Medigap plan is to create a predictable expense structure . If you do n't have a Medigap plan and visited the hospital/had a surgery/etc . , you 'll end up with a massive medical bill real quick . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Skilled Nursing Care is covered under Medicare Part A and can only follow at least a three day stay in a hospital . Skilled Nursing Care is rehab , the goal at a Skilled Nursing Facility is to get you better so you can come home . Medicare covers Skilled Nursing Care at 100 % for the first 20 days . If your doctor thinks you should stay longer than 20 days Medicare starts charging a co-pay of $ 157.50 per day for days 21-100 . Skilled Nursing Care should not be confused with Long Term Care because Medicare will only allow you to stay up to 100 days in a Skilled Nursing Facility . Be sure your Medicare Supplement policy covers the additional days -LRB- 21-100 -RRB- in a Skilled Nursing Facility .
You would need Long Term Care Insurance if you were no longer able to care for yourself and wanted to receive your care in your home or other location besides a nursing home . Medicare will pay for home health care or nursing home care if there is a need for skilled nursing services . If you need assistance with dressing and showering but do n't need IV 's , physical therapy , speech therapy , or other skilled nursing care , Medicare will not pay for in home services , adult day care , assisted living , or nursing home . Long Term Care insurance will pay for all those options if you are unable to perform 2 or 3 activities of daily living .
Medicare can provide some limited skilled nursing home care benefits under Part A . During the first 20 days of a benefit period , you pay $ 0 . From days 21-100 , you pay $ 152 per day . Days 101 + , you 're responsible for all costs . Medicare.gov provides a list of each specific covered service and eligibility conditions that need to be met for Medicare to cover nursing home care expenses . Medicaid can help pay nursing home expenses for Medicare beneficiaries . Long term care insurance is going to provide the greatest nursing home benefits . These policies are designed for long-term stays -LRB- e.g. 3 , 4 , or 5 years -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If the hospital stay that preceded your admittance into the nursing home was at least a three day stay , was for the condition that requires skilled care , and a few other stipulations , you will be admitted to a Medicare bed in the nursing home . For 20 days , all nursing home expenses are paid by Medicare . After 20 days , there is a copay until the maximum length of 100 days , at which time Medicare no longer contributes to nursing home expenses .
Nursing home care is covered by Medicare in some circumstances . 1 . You must stay in a Medicare certified skilled nursing facility . 2 . You must enter the nursing home after a qualified inpatient hospital stay of at least three consecutive days -LRB- starting with the day you enter the hospital , not counting the day you leave -RRB- . 3 . You must enter the SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- within 30 days . 4 . Your doctor must have ordered the SNF stay due to your need for more than custodial care on a daily basis , and the SNF care must be for something treated during the qualifying hospital stay . 5 . Medicare Part A pays for up to 100 days of nursing home coverage .
Medicare can pay for nursing home stays under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- The nursing home stay must be within 30 days of a qualified hospital stay in the hospital of at least days . 2 -RRB- There must be a prescribed medical need for daily skilled nursing or rehabilitative care . 3 -RRB- The facility must be Medicare approved . 4 -RRB- Medicare will only continue as long as the patient is showing improvement . 5 -RRB- The first 20 days are totally covered . Days 21-100 charge a co-payment that was $ 144.50 per day in 2012 . After 100 days , Medicare no longer pays any benefits for nursing home care .
Medicare is designed to provide benefits for certain healthcare related expenses . Part A covers hospital stays , and Part B covers doctors services , medical supplies , and outpatient care . Nursing homes primarily provide for long term care needs - assistance with the activities of daily living . Medical care provided by the nursing home may be covered such as skilled nursing care , and rehabilitation services . But the cost of the residence , meals , and unskilled nursing are not covered by Medicare regardless of the diagnosis .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance.It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare does not pay for assisted living or nursing home . It will provide some short term rehab services in a nursing home but it is not designed to pay long term . To receive nursing home benefits you must be hospitalized at least three days not counting day of discharge , and need skilled care that can not be provided at home related to the reason you entered the hospital . Medicare will only pay up to 100 days .
When qualification is met for admittance to a nursing home Medicare bed , Medicare will pay all charges for a semiprivate room for the first 20 days -LRB- minus conveniences such as phone or TV -RRB- . For the next 80 days the nursing home resident must pay a co-pay . In 2013 , the co-pay is $ 148 . After that , Medicare does not pay for nursing home stay unless a new 100 day benefit period .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Where Can I Find Health Insurance Quotes ?
There are many sites where you can get instant health insurance quotes online . When you visit a page that provides online quotes , you follow the prompts on the screen . When it comes to health insurance , I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker because of all of the moving parts involved and it can be difficult for some to compare plans.You can run instant health quotes on my website if you 'd like -LRB- link available on my profile page -RRB- as well as other types including life , disablity , senior insurance , etc.Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Health insurance quotes are provided by may resources including experienced brokers and their top-rated websites . With more than 33 years as a health insurance broker , that 's what we do best . We shop for consumers so they can save . There are other ways to get quotes , including directly through the carrier -LRB- you do not get a lower rate -RRB- or through the . gov Exchange website ... assuming it is working !
The quote engine on my website quotes to $ 5,000,000 . You can input the gender , ages , build , and health conditions of the persons you are looking to cover to get an idea of what the premiums will be for them . Take the result times 2.35 to get the approximate premium for $ 12,000,000 . My expertise is in finding the best health rating and price for each person . Whenever you are looking at more than one person , there is a health factor involved , that possibly , not even the applicant is aware they have . After 12 years of finding the best quotes for hundreds of impaired risk applicants each month , I can definitely help you in that crucial and foundational step . After finding your best carrier , I would work with the `` big case '' department of that company to knock out the details . They know all the ropes so you can get the rate you qualify for . I am connected with a prestigious brokerage whose reps will bend over backwards to help get this done in the smoothest possible fashion . If you would like my personal assistance , I would be happy to help . As you can see , there are several good agents who put a lot of time answering consumer questions on this website , and I 'm sure that all of us are qualified in different ways , to pull this off for you . While we love to do this as a service , it is always a joy when one of our answers prompts someone to contact us .
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
You can easily compare term life insurance quotes by going to a website that shows you quotes from multiple companies . If you pick a website with `` instant '' quotes , the quotes will come up comparing quotes from different companies , and you can then change variables to compare quotes on different policies within that company . Once you see a policy you are interested in , be sure to talk to someone at that agency , or communicate by email , so that you can be sure you qualify for that particular rate . No quote engine can cover every question , and you may find that there is an even lower price out there for you , or a policy that works better for your needs . But comparing quotes online is a good place to start .
There are many sites where you can get instant health insurance quotes online . When you visit a page that provides online quotes , you follow the prompts on the screen . However , when it comes to health insurance , I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker because of all of the moving parts involved and it can be difficult for some to compare plans.You can run instant health quotes on my website if you 'd like -LRB- link available on my profile page -RRB- as well as other types including life , disablity , senior insurance , etc. . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are many sites where you can get instant health insurance quotes online . When you visit a page that provides online quotes , you follow the prompts on the screen . When it comes to health insurance , I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker because of all of the moving parts involved and it can be difficult for some to compare plans.You can run instant health quotes on my website if you 'd like -LRB- link available on my profile page -RRB- as well as other types including life , disablity , senior insurance , etc.Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are many sites where you can get instant health insurance quotes online . When you visit a page that provides online quotes , you follow the prompts on the screen . When it comes to health insurance , I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker because of all of the moving parts involved and it can be difficult for some to compare plans.You can run instant health quotes on my website if you 'd like -LRB- link available on my profile page -RRB- as well as other types including life , disablity , senior insurance , etc. . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
You have many options for getting a health insurance quote ; 1 -RRB- you can contact an agent who sells health insurance directly 2 -RRB- you can go online and find companies that will allow you to put in your information and get a quote 3 -RRB- you can contact a health insurance carrier , tell them you want a quote and they will direct you Health Insurance will be very competive as the months go by and we enter into 2014 when Obamacare changes will take effect . Look for a good agent now and compare policies , provisions and prices . You should be able to find a plan that meets your needs .
If your health and build are normal , you can easily find a quote for $ 500,000 of life insurance by using an online quote engine that offers instant quotes . Our website even offers possible quotes for people with controlled health conditions . Once you get an idea of the rates , be sure to talk to a representative from the agency to run over all your health details so that you get the best possible quote for your unique circumstances .
California life insurance quotes can be found online through life insurance websites that have a quote engine that you can use -LRB- most do -RRB- . If you want to compare multiple companies at the same time , I would recommend using the quote engine from a life insurance broker website -LRB- brokers are insurance agents who can quote and sell products from multiple companies -RRB- . The quote engines will typically request a few pieces of data such as your name , date of birth , height/weight profile , any prescriptions you take or medical conditions you 're being treated for , the state you live in , and the amount and length of coverage to quote . Once you hit submit , an instant quote will be generated for you to review and an agent will likely follow-up with you shortly . Please note , an instant quote is , in short , just a rough estimate . The risk classification you qualify for is the MOST important factor in creating a quote because it 's what determines the premiums for the desired coverage -LRB- e.g. being approved for a standard risk class vs. a preferred plus risk class will result in very different numbers -RRB- . If you are being treated for any medical conditions or take a number of prescriptions , you will get a much more accurate response by consulting with an insurance broker.who can shop the case for you . Buying life insurance can be a very strenuous and time consuming task when you try to do it on your own . We do not charge any fees for our services , so you can only help yourself by talking with a broker . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best way to find health insurance quotes is through an independent agent . They will be able to save you a lot of time and give you unbiased advice on which plans that would meet your needs . Several independent agents even have websites that you can start by running a health insurance quote online . A good website would show you health insurance plans from several carriers and give you contact information to follow up with an experienced health insurance agent . You can run quotes on our website for health insurance and for Medicare supplement plans . If looking for under age 65 health insurance plans click on `` other '' or give us a call .
There are two paths to getting group health insurance for your business . First , the `` do it yourself '' approach where you can call up or go to a health insurance carrier 's web site and request a quote . Of course , this assumes you know all the health insurance carrier options in your state and that you will know what information you need to have available to get a quote . You may also discover that a health insurance carrier does n't work directly with the group consumer and they will recommend you seek out an insurance broker . Keep in mind that a group health insurance carrier can only talk to you about their products and services so you ca n't expect them to help you comparison shop and , of course , every health insurance carrier thinks their products are the best . This brings us to the appropriate option , seek out a group health insurance broker . Do a web search , ask a fellow businessperson or friend but find an experienced , knowledgeable employee benefits professional to guide you through this process . There is a lot involved in setting up an employee benefits program and with the market changes imposed by Obamacare the task has become even more complex and demanding . If you are needing help in setting up or reviewing your group health plan contact me at WEBSITELINK .
There are many sites where you can get instant health insurance quotes online . When you visit a page that provides online quotes , you follow the prompts on the screen . However , when it comes to health insurance , I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker because of all of the moving parts involved and it can be difficult for some to compare plans.You can run instant health quotes on my website if you 'd like -LRB- link available on my profile page -RRB- as well as other types including life , disability , senior insurance , etc.Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Health insurance for small businesses works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan . There are different types of programs available for group coverage and each business may have a different tolerance for what they 're willing to take on in terms of price or what they 're willing to offer to their employees . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There 's really no way to say what group coverage costs without going through that input first to create the quotes . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you will need to consult with an experienced health insurance broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help -LRB- we can help you get your company 's group health insurance set up -RRB- and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Group health insurance is health insurance a business owns and offers to its employees . The business generally pays for a percentage of the premiums with the employees paying the rest . It 's often offered as a means of attracting people to come work from them . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you 'll need to contact a health insurance agent - working with an independent one will allow you to shop for quotes from multiple companies in one place . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your health insurance needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Group health insurance works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan Group health insurance is health insurance a business owns and offers to its employees . The business generally pays for a percentage of the premiums with the employees paying the rest . It 's often offered as a means of attracting people to come work from them . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , I recommend contacting an experienced broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . Having too many `` hands in the cookie jar '' can sometimes make things confusing . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
To compare life insurance quotes in Mississippi , you can go to a website that offers life insurance in Mississippi , put in your date of birth , gender , height , weight , whether you use tobacco , and basic health conditions . If the quoter does not have those fields , the quote will be a general quote , which is not at all accurate . But it can show you what that best rates run in MS. You can also call or email an online agency that offers life insurance in Mississippi to obtain your quote . They will run through the health questions with you and help you compare quotes from multiple companies . Looking at the leaderboard , some of us have online agencies , so that is a place to start . Or you can use a search engine to find one .
The internet has dramatically changed the way people shop for life insurance , period . Finding quotes online for California or any State are pretty easy . Find a website with a life insurance quote engine and begin your quotes , keep in mind that most quotes online are just estimates you could be better off speaking with a live independent broker . Make sure to speak with a broker because he or she will shop many different companies to get you the best price and policy possible . With some technology to day online you can get quotes and buy a policy within minute 's right from your home or office if you qualify .
I would suggest looking at an instant term life insurance site in a couple of ways . Some local agents may provide an instant quote on their website . You can search for `` life insurance quotes '' and see which are offering quotes . Some sites may say quotes but they are a contact form . Some sites are actual quotes and show up immediately . You can call the agent at your convenience if you have questions . Some agent site allow you put in your application right away and get the process started . Another option is Term4Sale.com . It has a online quote then it will show your 3 agents . Look for one with a local phone number and give them a call . If you have a long term health issue , you are better served calling an agent that is independent with multiple carriers and find the best fit for you .
end question
start question
annuities
Do Fixed Annuities Have A Death Benefit ?
All annuities can designate a beneficiary . Once an annuity starts paying a lifetime income , the option selected will determine if there is any death benefit payable . The basic option is a lifetime income and while this benefit will pay until the annuitant dies , there isnt any benefit for a beneficiary . However , there are options for having the benefit cover the lives of two individuals , or last a specific period of time . These would result in either a continuation of benefits for the beneficiary .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
Life settlements for life insurance are the options that the beneficiary has in receiving the death benefit upon the death of the Insured person . 1 -RRB- Lump Sum . The entire amount is paid to the beneficiary , all at one time , shortly after the Insured person 's death . 2 -RRB- Fixed Amount . The death benefit is paid in set installments , plus interest , until the entire death benefit has been paid to the beneficiary . 3 -RRB- Fixed Period . A time in the future is set when the entire death benefit is to be received in full by the beneficiary . Then it is paid at set times , plus interest , so that the entire amount is paid out by that point in time . 4 -RRB- Interest Only . The life insurance company holds the death benefit in trust and pays the interest earned to the beneficiary at set intervals . The death benefit is paid out in a life income plan . 5 -RRB- Life Income . The insurance company uses the death benefit to purchase Single Premium Immediate Annuity , so that income to the beneficiary will continue as long as the beneficiary is alive .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
Yes , ING does sell annuities . They have a complete portfolio of annuities including : Fixed Annuities - a type of annuity that will pay you a fixed rate of return . Indexed Annuities - an annuity that credits interest based on the performance of an index . Immediate Annuities - this annuity is for someone with a lump sum of money who is interested in immediately turning that amount of money into a guaranteed income stream . Annuities are an important retirement planning vehicle with tax deferral , death benefit , and optional living benefits .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Hybrid annuities are fixed indexed annuities , equity indexed annuities , or variable annuities with a rider that offers lifetime income . Some also offer enhanced death benefit , long term care , and/or home health care . Hybrid annuities work by allowing the buyer to invest funds in a fixed account as well as variable account . The fixed account provides the guaranteed funds and the variable components provide for greater return by investing in non-guaranteed securities .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does Medigap Mean ?
Medigap is another name for Medicare Supplement plans . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medigap plan is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well .
Medigap is another name for Medicare Supplements . Medicare insurance pays for many medical expenses , but not all of them . The different Medicare Supplements can fill some or most of those gaps , hence the name Medigap . To find out which Medigap plan fits your needs the best , talk to a local agent .
Medicare is not designed to cover every medical expense . There will always be copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles to meet . Prescription drugs are not covered by Medicare parts A and B. Medigap policies are issued by private companies . You pay a monthly premium for a guaranteed renewable policy . Medigap policies do not cover prescription drugs . You must purchase a separate part D plan from a private carrier .
Since all Medigap plans are standardized , the benefits are exactly the same with every insurance company . This means that Medigap Plan F with ABC insurance company is the exact same Medigap Plan F with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is price . Medicare does not regulate the price of Medigap Plans ... just the benefits . That 's why there is such a competitive market . Many Medicare Beneficiaries like the idea of purchasing Medigap through a well known insurance company , but that does n't mean you are going to get the best price . Medigap is not like health insurance for under age 65 where a Medical director approves or denies your bills . Medigap payments are made by the insurance carrier if it 's a Medicare approved item because they have to -- it 's the law . I suppose that was the long way of saying there is n't one insurance company that has the best Medigap coverage . They all offer the same standardized plans and pay the bills based upon CMS regulations .
It depends on your needs , budget , and preferences . I would recommend consulting with an independent Medigap broker who can work with you on a personal level and help you evaluate your options . If you want to create a predictable healthcare expense structure where you do n't have to worry about receiving massive medical bills , you may want to consider buying a Medigap plan -LRB- most likely a Medigap Plan F or Plan G -RRB- . The premiums for Medigap plans are typically a little higher than a Medicare Advantage plan , but they feature much broader coverage . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable and are standardized -LRB- meaning a given Medigap plan features the same benefits regardless of the carrier you have it through - a plan F from company ABC is the same plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . They also have no networks , meaning you can go to any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- the vast majority do these days and you can check to see if a doctor in your area does using a physician finder tool on Medicare 's website , Medicare.gov -RRB- . As far as services go , if your doctor accepts Medicare , then they have to accept your Medigap plan as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on your needs , budget , and preferences . I would recommend consulting with an independent Medigap broker who can work with you on a personal level and help you evaluate your options . If you want to create a very well-controlled , predictable healthcare expense structure where you do n't have to worry about receiving massive medical bills , you may want to consider buying a Medigap plan -LRB- most likely a Medigap Plan F or Plan G -RRB- . The premiums for Medigap plans are typically a little higher than a Medicare Advantage plan , but they feature much broader coverage . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable and are standardized -LRB- meaning a given Medigap plan features the same benefits regardless of the carrier you have it through - a plan F from company ABC is the same plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . They also have no networks , meaning you can go to any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- the vast majority do these days and you can check to see if a doctor in your area does using a physician finder tool on Medicare 's website , Medicare.gov -RRB- . As far as services go , if your doctor accepts Medicare , then they have to accept your Medigap plan as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
Yes , you can be declined for Medigap insurance , but there 's usually a company that will likely take you unless certain events occur -LRB- e.g. you 're about to go in for major surgery -RRB- When you apply for Medigap coverage outside of your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare -LRB- and do n't have a special enrollment period qualifying event -RRB- , you can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering the health questions on the application -RRB- . Each insurance company has their own health questions so you may be able to qualify for one company and not another if you have certain major medical conditions you 're being treated for/have been treated for in the last few years -LRB- e.g. insulin-dependent diabetic , heart disease , cancer history , etc. -RRB- . This makes when you 're new to Medicare the best time to first buy a Medigap plan . You will have a a 6-month window to buy any Medigap plan and the carrier can not decline you for any medical issues - meaning no medical underwriting during this period . You should work with an independent broker who can review options from many companies and make sure that the Medigap plan you purchase is offering you the benefits at the lowest possible cost . Please remember , Medigap plans are standardized , meaning that regardless of the insurance company you have the coverage through , they will ALL pay the same exact way . The only difference is the price you 're paying . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap insurance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Yes , Medigap and a Medicare Supplement are actually pseudonyms , two different terms that mean the exact same thing . Medigap refers to a policy that `` fills in the gaps '' of what Medicare does not pay , much like a Medicare Supplement , which is intended to `` supplement payment for items that Medicare does not pay in full . '' Either way you say it , both terms mean the same thing .
AARP Medigap plans are Medigap plans insured through United Healthcare . In short , AARP partnered with United Healthcare to attach their name to UHC 's products . As Medigap plans feature standardized benefits , the coverage under each Medigap plan is exactly the same as it would be if you purchased the coverage from another carrier . The main way the AARP Medigap plans differentiates themselves from other Medigap carriers is through their premium rating method . Most carriers determine their rates based on the attained-age rating method -LRB- your age at the time you apply with rates increasing as you get older each year -RRB- . AARP Medigap plans -LRB- insured through United Healthcare -RRB- are based on the community-rated method -LRB- everyone in an area pays the same rates regardless of their age - meaning an 85 year old is paying the same thing as a 75 year old -RRB- . Please note , the carrier also offers value-added services such as discounts for certain things such as eye exams and also offer a 24/7 nurse hotline , and silversneakers membership . You must be an AARP member to buy an AARP Medigap plan - membership can be attained during the application process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and comparison and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
United Healthcare is an insurance company that offers senior products including Medicare supplements and others - they are the largest insurance company in the industry . Medicare is a government-run senior health insurance program . Even though Medigap plans are standardized , it 's not all about price and there are many parts that are often overlooked/not considered when evaluating and comparing plans . UHC has an agreement with AARP to attach their name to certain products -LRB- a common one seen is AARP Medigap plans -RRB- . The great advantage with the AARP Medigap plans -LRB- insured through United Healthcare -RRB- is they use the community-rated pricing method as opposed to the attained-age method most Medigap carriers use . The community-rating states that everyone in a given group -LRB- e.g. zip code -RRB- pays the same rates regardless of age , meaning an 85 year old can be paying the same thing as a 75 year old -LRB- which means major savings over the long run -RRB- . They also offer some of the most lenient medical underwriting for Medigap plans so for individuals with complex medical histories , the UHC/AARP Medigap plans can be a great product for your health insurance needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
It depends a lot on which Medigap Plan you have . Medigap Plans are designed to cover most of what original Medicare Part A & Part B does not cover . However , all Medigap Plans do not have prescription drug coverage . You would need to get a Part D plan in addition to cover prescriptions . This is a good thing because you will be able to change your drug plan as your prescription needs change without needing to change your Medigap Plan . Medigap Plans also do not cover dental and vision , however , you can get a separate dental/vision plan . The quickest way to find out what Medigap Plans cover and is to go to our website . You can compare Medigap Plans instantly online at SummitMedigap.com .
Medigap and Med Advantage plans are SIGNIFICANTLY different . For a MedAdvantage Plan , they are basically like an HMO . You have a primary physician who is essentially the gate keeper . You do need referrals and you do have co-pays . A Med Advantage plan does also contain a drug plan component , which the supplements do not . If you have significant health issues , than of course the co-pays can add up , however the monthly premium is usually significantly less than the average Medigap plan . Medigap Plans again , are significantly different . The coverage provided by a Medigap Plan is dependent upon what plan you get . The plans are all identified by a corresponding letter . For example , an F Plan tends to offer the most solid coverage , but of course the price is among the highest as you 'd expect . Each lettered plan is written and designed by the government , so no F Plan is different than another , no G is different than another G , etc etc. . What is different is what each individual insurance company charges for the play . So it 's not uncommon for company A to charge 1 price for an F Plan , and companies B , C , D , & E all have significantly different prices for the exact SAME COVERAGE . One thing that I would do is make sure you understand how each lettered plan works , because the difference in coverage can be quite significant . For example , make sure you understand exactly what a `` Part B Excess Charge '' is . In some states , such as PA , they are illegal , but in my state , which is NJ they are perfectly legal . If you purchase a plan that does n't cover the Part B Excess Charge , you could find yourself pleasantly surprised by a significant bill if you ever have a major procedure done . Medigap Plans DO NOT come with a drug plan , or vision plan or dental . A Drug Plan is the only one you are REQUIRED to get , or you could face a penalty by the government . But again , the drug plan must be purchased on the side , as there is no such thing as a Medigap that comes with a drug plan .
There are many companies that offer Medigap plans , but not every company offers every plan and in every state . Most insurance companies have a handful of states they do business in for their Medigap plans and only sell several of the available plans -LRB- e.g. company XYZ only sells Medigap plans A , F , G , and N -RRB- . Since Medigap plans are standardized -LRB- meaning the coverage is the same , regardless of the company it 's through - the only difference being the price of the coverage -RRB- , it 's important to find out all of the carriers that offer plans in your zip code . Some of the big name companies in the Medigap marketplace include , but are not limited to , United Healthcare -LRB- parternered with AARP to use their name on their Medigap plans -RRB- , Omaha , WellPoint -LRB- Anthem and other Blue Cross carriers -RRB- , Aetna , Cigna , Humana , Central States Indemnity , Medico , New Era , Royal Neighbors of America , United American , and Equitable , to name a few - there are a number of other companies out there in the Medigap marketplace . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
A Medigap policy plugs the gaps that Medicare A & B does n't cover . A person can get a Medigap plan part of what Medicare does not may or they can get a Medigap plan to cover all of what Medicare does not pay . The cost varies depending on which plan a person chooses .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Am I Liable If Someone Gets Hurt In My Timeshare ?
That is a great question ! The short answer is it depends . If I assume correctly that this is a points based timeshare arrangement , one of those `` vacation club '' kind of things , then it typically falls upon the resort management 's policy . But if you 've traded , sold or otherwise allowed someone else into your space on your time , then you may possibly be liable , depending upon the terms of the contract that you signed . If this is a property that you are an owner of for a specific number of years , then the liability issues may be more yours than the true property owners . Again , it will depend entirely on the policy exclusions that were in the contract you signed at purchase . If you own the property , most likely it 's you . My recommendation is to take a look at your contract and see , and if you can not find it , contact the company and have them send you a copy . You will have a better idea where you stand after looking at the terms . Good luck , and thank you for asking !
Time shares running as short term vacation rentals should have some sort of commercial liability on them . There is a great company CBIZ Vacation Rental Insurance Insuring these types of vacation rentals all over the US . I used to work for them and can still help if you are in AZ or WY . But all other states should contact them directly .
Let 's be realistic , your home is where you are at and a reasonably understanding of liability means you can be held responsible for the injuries a guest suffers while in your home . Your responsibility in any event is n't likely to absolve the property management company -LRB- or the property owner -RRB- of liability -LRB- or at least a duty to defend themselves -RRB- because no self-respecting plaintiff 's attorney would let a potential pocket full of money get by him or her in the process of assigning liability . The good news is that if you have home insurance you have some amount of liability insurance to protect for the injuries that someone may suffer as a consequence of your negligence anywhere you are at . That includes the time share you have bought and including the property you have traded for in your time-share relationship . Now , none of the latter should be construed to make you liable for any event , only to clarify that you are indeed responsible for your actions and that includes the space you may be occupying as a temporary residence , whether a time share or a hotel room . How much liability you have depends on plenty of things we could speculate on but the answer above stands for itself . Even if you are found to be free of liability , the cost of defense and getting to that point in time after an event is still costly and your liability coverage includes the benefit of defense against these allegations . Liability is expensive to defend and costly to pay for in the absence of insurance so a basic understanding of the tort of negligence and your duties is all I intend to imply in the latter answer .
That is a great question ! The short answer is it depends . If I assume correctly that this is a points based timeshare arrangement , one of those `` vacation club '' kind of things , then it typically falls upon the resort management 's policy . But if you 've traded , sold or otherwise allowed someone else into your space on your time , then you may possibly be liable , depending upon the terms of the contract that you signed . If this is a property that you are an owner of for a specific number of years , then the liability issues may be more yours than the true property owners . Again , it will depend entirely on the policy exclusions that were in the contract you signed at purchase . If you own the property , most likely it 's you . My recommendation is to take a look at your contract and see , and if you can not find it , contact the company and have them send you a copy . You will have a better idea where you stand after looking at the terms . Good luck , and thank you for asking !
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
That is a really good question ! I am glad that your son was n't badly hurt ; God is good ! Insurance companies on the other hand are not quite so giving ... In a no fault State , the payment for claims is not dependent upon who caused the accident . Each person files with their own company , regardless of who was at fault . Your son 's insurance company would therefore be liable for the claim for damages and/or medical expenses , and would pay them according to the terms dictated in the policy . That would include , unfortunately , the deductible and co-pays . They should cover everything over those , but I 'd expect them to poke you for the deductible and your son 's share of the expenses . You can try to dispute it , and with the help of a lawyer , possibly be able to sue in small claims court the driver -LRB- or the other driver , if there was another car that had caused the accident -RRB- for those costs . I hope it all works out well for him and you , and that his healing is quick and complete . Thank you for asking !
How much money would you need to replace your personal property ? If someone is hurt or property is damaged and you are legally liable , how much coverage do you want from your insurance company ? Your answer to these will set the price of a tenants policy . Tenants policies are quite inexpensive . For someone with $ 20,000 of contents living in an apartment in Fresno , CA , you could expect to pay around $ 10-20 per month .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
I previously posted this piece in response to a renter insurance question . I am sharing it here , hoping that it might be of value in answer to this inquiry . Mr. Pipes provides a good summary before me and concludes with an important question . I am adding this message with a personal example of the value of this coverage . Renters insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and several other common loss circumstances . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
There are two parts to this answer because there are two coverages in a tenants policy . Animals are normally not covered as personal property . If your pet dies in a house fire , there probably isnt any recovery . However , if your animal hurts someone other than a household member , there might be coverage if you are legally liable to pay damages . However , you should carefully check your policy as many exclude various breeds of animals and many also limit the amount of liability coverage in the event of an animal related incident .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
I like to look at this question a little differently . There are basically three parts to your auto insurance policy . One part covers you if you hurt somebody -LRB- or something -RRB- . A second part covers you and your family if someone hurts you and does n't have any insurance or not enough to reimburse you for your injuries/suffering/lost earnings . A third part covers the car you may be driving should it be damaged . How much coverage would you expect someone to have if they hurt you or a family member ? That is a good guide for how much liability coverage you should consider . Your liability limit for others and uninsured/under-insured motorists limit for you should be consistent . If someone or something damaged your car , would you want to be reimbursed ? If so , your auto insurance should include comprehensive and collision coverage . Older fully paid car ? Still may be worth several thousand dollars and well worth insuring . It 's better to have a higher deductible than no coverage at all . If your insurance coverage meets these tests , this may be the best insurance coverage for you . Then I like to consider insurers who will also provide my homeowner 's / tenant 's coverage through a respected local agent with reasonably competitive premiums .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
As a big do it yourselfer , the answer is maybe ? It depends on what your situation is and how adept you are on gathering information and making a good decision from all the information out there . I mean I like to work on my cars and trucks . I can do many things myself and feel really good about it . However , I do still use my trusted mechanic for the things I simply am not good enough to do myself and that way I avoid putting my family at risk . As another noted , there are absolutely no price savings in going without an agent . The laws in most states prevent any discounting for doing it yourself . It never ever hurts to become informed about a product . I have taught my son the doctor , how to frame a house , wire a house and have a general understanding about construction . He 's a doctor now , and yes , that is fun to say , he has learned enough about how to build that when he decides to build , he can have a good conversation with a builder and know when to call shenanigans or not . By all means it pays to educate yourself , but understand that an open mind is required to educate yourself .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
I am sure you want to know the cost per month of a policy . These average about $ 10-15 per month but that is not the important issue . The cost of not having the policy can be enormous . If someone enters your rental unit and is injured you could be liable for a lawsuit that would bankrupt you . If the unit catches on fire and is destroyed , your personal property will not be replaced without a tenants policy and the additional costs you incur while waiting for the unit to be repaired wouldnt be covered either . The cost at a time of claim makes the premium seem insignificant .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
That is a great question ! The answer will depend upon your company , and the policy restrictions . It may cover for a specified number of days , it may cover until the repairs to your vehicle are completed . A couple of years ago my car was hit , and the driver at faults insurance covered my rental car . After a week , they notified me that they were no longer going to cover the rental car , and it would be my expense . My car was n't finished , and the insurance company had not been in a hurry to see it get finished . After discussing the situation with them , they agreed to pay until my car was completed . They were n't happy , but were liable . If you would like some details on that discussion , contact me , and I 'll share them with you . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
home-insurance
How To Get Homeowners Insurance Quote ?
There are several ways to obtain a quote for homeowners insurance . You may certainly fill out a quote form online ; almost every big name carrier has one on their website/app . The problem with doing a quote yourself is that you are not a licensed insurance agent , you likely do not know what limits you should have . Most online quotes also do not run your credit or loss history , which may have big impacts on your premium . What is the best way to get an accurate quote ? Contact a licensed independent insurance agent and give them your information . Ask questions ! Tell them your story ! Tell them what kinds of things you own ! If you want your assets properly covered more information is better . Most agencies have a form on their website/app a prospect may complete . Otherwise email or call asking for a quote .
Getting the best life insurance quotes can be like walking a tightrope . Some agents will quote low just to get your application . Then when you are approved , they simply send you the policy , assuming you will be tired of the process and just give in and accept it.Other agents quote high because they would rather give you good news that your rate turned out lower than higher than quoted . What really matters in the end , is that you get a policy with a life insurance company that is favorable to your type of health , age , and the type of policy you get -LRB- Term , Whole Life , or Universal Life -RRB- . So no matter what quote you get , you need to pay close attention to the credentials of your agent . Some things to look at are : 1 -RRB- Are they able to shop for you from more than one company ? 2 -RRB- Do they ask questions to determine what policies and ratings you qualify for ? 3 -RRB- Do they appear to understand your health condition -LRB- s -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Do they have a following as evidenced by testimonials , referrals , etc ? 5 -RRB- If they have a website , does it have security and privacy features ? 6 -RRB- Do they appear to be sincere and honest ? If you can get in touch with an agent who has those credentials , chances are that your quote will be as accurate as possible . More importantly , no matter what your quote is , you will have the best chance at being approved at the best rate with the best company for your particular health and age .
the most efficient way to get a lower auto insurance quote is to get quotes from several independent auto insurance agents . that way , you 're only contacting a handful of agents but can get quotes from dozens of companies . word of caution : if you 're getting a quote online , make sure the websites you get quotes from have a name , address and phone number listed . If not , you 're quoting with a lead generation site . lead generation sites do not sell insurance . they simply sell your information to insurance agents . you may find the lowest rate this way , but your phone will blow in the process . any legitimate agent will have their info listed on the website .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
There are many contributors to this website that offer free life insurance quotes on our own business websites . Some , like ours , will even give quotes for certain health conditions . Keep in mind that accurate quotes are dependent on variables that can not possibly covered with an online quote engine , unless that quote engine is for a specific simplified issue -LRB- no exam -RRB- product . Quotes can be firmed up by additional questions asked over the phone or by email . To get the lowest priced quotes for your unique profile , contact an agency that is reputable and knows how to match you up with the companies best suited to your health , age , build and tobacco status .
There are several ways to obtain a quote for homeowners insurance . You may certainly fill out a quote form online ; almost every big name carrier has one on their website/app . The problem with doing a quote yourself is that you are not a licensed insurance agent , you likely do not know what limits you should have . Most online quotes also do not run your credit or loss history , which may have big impacts on your premium . What is the best way to get an accurate quote ? Contact a licensed independent insurance agent and give them your information . Ask questions ! Tell them your story ! Tell them what kinds of things you own ! If you want your assets properly covered more information is better . Most agencies have a form on their website/app a prospect may complete . Otherwise email or call asking for a quote .
Life insurance quotes are an estimation of the premiums you would pay for a given life insurance coverage structure -LRB- face amount and term length -RRB- . However , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . So if you run a quote at the most preferred rates and have n't factored in your height/weight , medications used , medical conditions , family medical history , tobacco usage , driving history issues , participation in extreme/hazardous activities , and a number of other factors , then the quote figures you ran are pretty much useless as they do not represent an accurate picture for the proposed coverage . The risk classification is the MOST IMPORTANT part of any quote an insurance agent gives you because the risk classification determines the premiums for the coverage . The final risk class a carrier approves you at after underwriting your policy will tell you what premiums the carrier will require for the coverage to be active . Many individuals like to see quotes with the most preferred rates -LRB- preferred plus risk class -RRB- as they are the cheapest cost and then they end up thinking that 's what they should get -LRB- and if they do n't get it , then they will forget the entire process and not even bother securing any coverage at all -RRB- . What you apply for is not always what you get - not everyone qualifies for the best rates . For example , if you have a major medical condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack , diabetic , had cancer , etc. -RRB- and the quote that was ran was for a preferred plus risk class , you 're wasting your time applying for it because every carrier is going to offer a higher risk class -LRB- and therefore require higher premiums -RRB- for the coverage -LRB- or possibly decline or postpone you for coverage depending on the details of the medical history -RRB- . This is why it 's critical to work with an experienced , knowledgeable , independent life insurance broker who knows the right questions to ask and can shop the case among multiple companies so they can give you the most accurate quotes up front that represent a realistic expectation of what you can expect to pay for the desired life insurance program . An important note : You NEVER want to just apply to a bunch of companies to see what sticks as this actually works against you because it 's a red flag to insurance companies when they complete the MIB check during underwriting -LRB- Medical Information Bureau - every carrier checks this because if you were declined by other companies , they want to know why -RRB- . You want to have your best -LRB- and most accurate -RRB- estimate up front so you get it right the first time so you can get the best rates for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Home insurance can be obtained numerous property and casualty insurance companies . If you currently have auto insurance , you may start with that company as having both auto and homeowners policies with the same company can provide discounts that reduce your overall cost . You can also get quotes online from companies such as State Farm , Farmer 's , Liberty Mutual , and Allstate . While these companies will provide quotes for their own companies , getting a quote from an insurance broker or AAA insurance can provide quotes from several different companies and may provide your best opportunity to find the lowest cost . Be sure to speak to an experienced insurance agent to ensure you have proper coverage . Just because once company has the lowest price does n't make it your best option . Be sure understand deductibles and riders such as earthquake insurance .
Homeowners Insurance is protection for the primary home of the titled owner of a house . Thus , the titled owner may purchase homeowners insurance for his/her home.The homeowners insurance contract has a conditional clause stating that without ownership , there is no coverage . It is important to review the definitions section of the homeowners contract to assure that coverage is intact per the contract . If you are in the process of purchasing a home , it is common to obtain a quote and purchase insurance a few days prior to the close of escrow ; this is done in order to have the insurance in place prior to the transfer of ownership . A mortgage loan can not be funded without the security of insurance to release the funds . For a quote online , you may go to : WEBSITELINK
The Average Person pays a wide variety of premium rates for homeowners insurance in the USA . Each State has a separate Department of Insurance and whole new set of rules regarding setting rates and risk assessment . Homeowners Insurance varies depending on geographic location , reconstruction cost of risk and prior history . There are also additional factors inclusive but not exclusive of optional limits required , amount of deductible and additional endorsements . If one is seeking a cheap but good homeowners insurance policy , the best way to handle it is obtain an online quote , request the minimum limits available forthe dwelling , the minimum personal liability limit available and the maximum deductible option ; these entries will produce the lowest rate for the specific home . Please do take into consideration thatthe lowest premium will beoffered by ` preferred insurance carriers ' who specialize inclaim free homes which are maintained inexcellent repair and display pride of ownership . To provide a simple , direct and online option to obtain a quote , the following link is available in multiple States : WEBSITELINK The above link will allow a client or a real estate professional to obtain a quote and purchase the insurance directly online .
Different websites have different ways of giving quotes online . With ours , you can put in your information and get quotes instantly , then change the variables to get different types of quotes . We also give average quotes for some health conditions . With others , you put in your information , then someone calls you with the actual quote . Either way , it is a good idea to talk to an agent to give the extra health details , help you decide the amount , and finalize your best , most accurate quote .
California life insurance quotes can be found online through life insurance websites that have a quote engine that you can use -LRB- most do -RRB- . If you want to compare multiple companies at the same time , I would recommend using the quote engine from a life insurance broker website -LRB- brokers are insurance agents who can quote and sell products from multiple companies -RRB- . The quote engines will typically request a few pieces of data such as your name , date of birth , height/weight profile , any prescriptions you take or medical conditions you 're being treated for , the state you live in , and the amount and length of coverage to quote . Once you hit submit , an instant quote will be generated for you to review and an agent will likely follow-up with you shortly . Please note , an instant quote is , in short , just a rough estimate . The risk classification you qualify for is the MOST important factor in creating a quote because it 's what determines the premiums for the desired coverage -LRB- e.g. being approved for a standard risk class vs. a preferred plus risk class will result in very different numbers -RRB- . If you are being treated for any medical conditions or take a number of prescriptions , you will get a much more accurate response by consulting with an insurance broker.who can shop the case for you . Buying life insurance can be a very strenuous and time consuming task when you try to do it on your own . We do not charge any fees for our services , so you can only help yourself by talking with a broker . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can easily compare term life insurance quotes by going to a website that shows you quotes from multiple companies . If you pick a website with `` instant '' quotes , the quotes will come up comparing quotes from different companies , and you can then change variables to compare quotes on different policies within that company . Once you see a policy you are interested in , be sure to talk to someone at that agency , or communicate by email , so that you can be sure you qualify for that particular rate . No quote engine can cover every question , and you may find that there is an even lower price out there for you , or a policy that works better for your needs . But comparing quotes online is a good place to start .
Sewer Backup Coverage is an essential coverage on Homeowners Insurance policies . On standard Homeowners Insurance policies , the coverage usually can be purchased as an optional endorsement ; in many cases , the carriers will offer $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 per incident for a premium of $ 20 - $ 75 per year . On High Value Homeowners policies , the coverage may be included in the policy form and in some cases offer coverage at the same limit as other perils covered under Coverage A - Dwelling . Sewer/Drain backup coverage will provide coverage should your drains become blocked and the water backs up causing water damage to your home . It is always important for a homeowner to check the drains annually and make sure that the water runs quickly through the drainage system without any obstacles ; there are liquids available for purchase at hardware stores that advertisethe clearing of drains but it may be more prudent to contact a plumbing professional for the best advice ! You may contact your insurance carrier to add this valuable coverage to your current policy or you may obtain a quote with the coverage included . For quotes in Arizona , California & Nevada , you may follow the link : WEBSITELINK
Asking how much life insurance cost is like asking a realtor how much a house costs . Could be $ 30,000 or $ 30 million it depends on what you want . The factors that an agent or life insurance company would need to begin the quoting process is type of policy , how much face amount , for how long , age , build , state of residence , tobacco use andgeneral health status . From there an agent or broker can get fairly close to a premium quote but understand the underwriters have the final say on your unique premium .
Homeowners insurance is important part of helping to protect yours ' and your family financial futures . A home is a huge investment without homeowners insurance how will you rebuild after a fire or tornado . How will your protect your assets if someone is hurt on your property if you do n't have homeowners insurance ? This is just a couple of the coverages that are provided by homeowners insurance . To find out more about what a homeowners insurance policy has to offer contact your local agent .
If your health and build are normal , you can easily find a quote for $ 500,000 of life insurance by using an online quote engine that offers instant quotes . Our website even offers possible quotes for people with controlled health conditions . Once you get an idea of the rates , be sure to talk to a representative from the agency to run over all your health details so that you get the best possible quote for your unique circumstances .
Most agents and brokers in New York use either the carrier websites or an online rating program to develop auto insurabnce quotes . Somewhere between 50 and 60 pieces of information are required just to select the rating ` tiers ' the carriers use . Some carriers have only 15 to 20tiers and some have over 100 . Your data isentered into the program . The carrier 's program uses this data to selectyour rating tier . Some factors such as : own or rent your home , gender , age , number of years licensed , driving record , credit profile , claims history -LRB- not only auto but property insurance claimsmay also be figured in ... -RRB- and on and on . Several years ago , only your driving record and claims history were the major factors involved . Today , your credit profile has a very major impact on how much you will pay - some carriers will not even develop a quote if your credit profile is not within their tolerances . So keep your credit score and profile as good as possible . Always ask your agent or broker for a ` guaranteed ' quote as some rating programs may not come up with a final ` guaranteed ' quote unless the agent or broker pays some fees for the data retrieval -LRB- of the credit data , claims data , and DMV extracts -RRB- to their system vendor or their carrier . In New York , insurance quote retrievals of your credit data are considered a ` no-hit ' to your credit status so you can ask several compnies to quote your insurance without penalty to your credit .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Does The Insurance Company Do When Your Car Is Stolen ?
If you car is stolen and not recovered then the insurance company , providing you have comprehensive coverage , will determine the actual cash value of your vehicle and then write you a check for the stolen vehicle . You will have to relinquish the title over to the insurance company . If you had a loan on the vehicle the loan will be paid off first and you will receive what ever is left . If you do not have comprehensive coverage then you have no coverage for the loss . If you car is recovered then it will be determined if the car is repairable or a total loss depending on the condition the car is found in . Most insurance companies will wait 30 days to see if the car is recovered or not then just call it a loss at that point if the car is not recovered .
The short answer is that unless the car is stolen , or parts of the car are stolen , theft of items from a car are not covered . You 'll seek this coverage from your homeowner insurance . If your car is stolen there is a small amount of coverage that comes from the auto after 48 hours . As usually , check with your local agent or insurance company to see how they have written your policy but what I have described in the common policy construction . Auto policies are not designed to coverage your personal property .
If you car is stolen and not recovered then the insurance company , providing you have comprehensive coverage , will determine the actual cash value of your vehicle and then write you a check for the stolen vehicle . You will have to relinquish the title over to the insurance company . If you had a loan on the vehicle the loan will be paid off first and you will receive what ever is left . If you do not have comprehensive coverage then you have no coverage for the loss . If you car is recovered then it will be determined if the car is repairable or a total loss depending on the condition the car is found in . Most insurance companies will wait 30 days to see if the car is recovered or not then just call it a loss at that point if the car is not recovered .
Car insurance will pay for a stolen car as long as you have comprehensive coverage . Comprehensive coverage covers the vehicle for damages not resulting from a collision accident . For example , fire , theft , glass breakage , a tree falls on the car , ect . If you car is stolen the insurance company will determined the blue book value and pay out the blue book value less your deductible . Kelly Blue Book is a good site to use to determine the value of your car . If your car is still financed and there is a gap in coverage you may end up stilling owing the finance company . Gap insurance is available to cover this need .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
If your asking will renters insurance cover a stolen car the answer is no . Auto insurance comprehensive coverage will cover a stolen car . If you asking if any of your personal items left in the car are covered for theft then the answer is theft from a vehicle is a covered peril . Now it would depend on what the item actually was that is in question and will the stolen item meet the deductible . Also if the auto was damaged during the incident you could potentially have two claims . One one the auto for the damage to the vehicle and on for your personal property that was in the vehicle . Also please note , items permanently mounted to your auto are part of the auto .
As a general rule , most homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for personal property that is stolen from a car . The stolen property will be subject to your property deductible and depending on the type of property stolen , your policy may have a limit to the coverage amount provided . For example , money , jewelry , electronic devices , and other `` high value '' items are typically limited to a maximum coverage amount of $ 500 - $ 1,000 unless your policy includes increased limits through an endorsement . As a side note , your auto policy may also include a small limit of coverage for property stolen from the vehicle .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
Car insurance will provide coverage if your car is stolen so long as your policy includes Comprehensive physical damage loss along with your chosen liabiulity protection . So long as you have comprehensive , the settlement for your stolen car would be handled from that by your claims professional . In order to file such a claim , it is very likely that your claims professonal will need to have a copy ofthe police report .
No , if your car is broken into and personal items stolen from it , there is no coverage for those items . Your car policy , so long as you have Comprehensive Physical Damage coverage , will take care of the damage caused to your car in the act of this crime . You will need to file a police report of course . Next turn to your Homeowners ' , Condo Unit Owners ' or Renters ' Insurance policy for coverage for your stolen belongings .
If you bought just liability coverage it will not pay if your car is stolen . It just depends what you selected when you bought your coverage . All states require at least a minimum amount of liability coverage before you can legally drive a car . You do not have to have insurance coverage that will pay to repair or replace your own car but you do have to protect other people 's property that you might damage with your auto .
Great question ! The answer depends upon a couple of things - your policies coverage , and where the laptop was when it was stolen . If it was taken from your apartment , then it generally will be . If it was in your car , parked in the apartment parking lot , there 's a good chance that you can get it replaced . If it was stolen at school , or you left it on a bus somewhere , that might be a whole lot harder to get back . I 'd advise you to contact your agent and tell them the story , and see what exactly your policy covers . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
Car insurance typically follows the car . That is , if you are insuring your car and you lend the vehicle to another driver , your insurance pays the damages . Also , if your car is stolen , ofcourse the damages caused would be covered by your own insurer . Each state is different so it is important to speak to a broker about your current state laws regarding following the driver or car .
Life insurance pays a death claim when you die . Car insurance pays a claim when your car is wrecked or stolen . Home owners insurance pays a claim if your home is damaged or for certain personal liabilities . Health insurance pays doctors and or hospitals when you incurr health care expenses . They are all similar but designed to do different things .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
Renters Insurance would take effect in the event of a loss to your personal property as well as peronal liability . If someone broke into your home your renters insurance would cover the stolen items , if the building were to burn down renters insurance would cover your personal property , also if you were to have your car broken into and items stolen those items would be covered under your renters insurance .
I can only think of two institutions that actually require car insurance . First , if the state in which you live and register your car has a law that imposes such a requirement in order to register it . Second , if you buy a new car with a lien or lease a new car , the financing company will imposes requirements for insurance . Now , that having been said , it still makes good sense to buy car insurance even if either of those two reasons are not imposed . Car insurance protects you in the event it is stolen , damaged in an accident or otherwise affected . But further , it provides important financial protection in the event you cause an accident and are held liable for any injuries or damage that result from that accident .
Great question ! You do not need renters insurance if you have a great amount of cash hidden away in a Swiss bank account , or somewhere similar . If your belongings are stolen or damaged somehow , you can just dip into that account and buy all new stuff to replace what was stolen or lost . If that is not you , then maybe renters insurance is a good idea . Most of us do not have the money to replace our things in the event of a fire , or burglary , and that is the purpose for the insurance . It can be a real blessing in the event of some unexpected hardship.If you would like some more information on what you should look for in the policy , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Assuming the GPS was stolen from inside an insured auto , the answer is maybe . If the GPS was installed in the car -LRB- e.g. , permanently attached in the dashboard -RRB- and the car had comprehensive coverage , then the GPS theft would be covered subject to the comprehensive deductible . However , if the GPS was of the type like mine that you affix to the windshield with a suction device , that would not be considered `` installed equipment '' and would not be eligible for the car 's comprehensive coverage . In that case , your only other possibility for coverage on the auto insurance would be if your policy provided additional coverage for personal items inside the car . Most standard auto coverage forms do not include additional coverage for personal items , but some do - usually capped at $ 1,000 - $ 2,000 . Also , your auto policy may have an added endorsement that provides coverage for personal items . The last resort - you may be able to claim the GPS theft on your homeowners -LRB- or renters policy -RRB- if the auto policy does not cover it .
If you own your house you need a homeowners policy because Renters insurance does not cover the dwelling . Part of your homeowners policy is personal property coverage which covers your personal belongings any where in the world . Coverage is limited to 10 % of your personal property limit if a claim occurs away from your home . For example , you are traveling on vacation and your luggage is stolen . Your house is insured for $ 500,000 and you have $ 350,000 personal property coverage . You will have coverage up to $ 35,000 for your stolen luggage .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Do I Do With My 401K When I Retire ?
When you retire your former employer will send you a letter describing the options available with your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan . Plans vary and so do options . As mentioned one of the frequently offered options is the privilege of rolling the account into a personal IRA . Since you would be gaining personal control of this asset this might be a very smart thing to do . If the employer allows you to keep the funds in his plan you should check to determine how much of the assets of the fund are invested in company stock . That could be a major consideration . Some 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans offer flexible arrangements but most will want the money settled in a short time after you retire . Your financial advisor or retirement income certified professional can give you helpful information concerning the options presented . This money needs to be used in a wise manner as you could be retired for a very long time .
If you are no longer working , and officially retired , you will have to roll your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into an IRA . This IRA may be mutual funds , stocks , bonds , annuities , etc. . I like to recommend Annuities which provide an Income Rider that will give you guaranteed income for life . The other reason to move your monies into an Annuity -LRB- as an IRA -RRB- , is to guarantee you will not loose any of the money you worked hard to earn . When you are retired , loosing 10 % or more will affect your financial status , the monies you have available to retire with . Talk to your advisor or broker . Or you are welcome to reach out to me for more information . Thank you .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 59 1/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
That is a really good question ! And trust me , you 're not the only one asking it ... There are really very few certainties in life , but we all seek to find as many as possible . Knowing that we have a safely protected retirement certainly ranks up near the top . While we can not guarantee that our retirement fund will last , there are some things that you can do to help ensure it : 1 . -RRB- Have a clear picture of what retirement means to you - does it mean travelling and dining out often ? If so , your fund will need to be large enough to accommodate that . If it looks more like fishing and working part time , then perhaps your fund can be a little more modest , and still be fine . But if you do not know , `` People without vision perish , '' as the Proverb goes . 2 . -RRB- Pay close attention to how your 401k is performing . If you do n't know what it is doing , you are right to worry . While I do not recommend knee jerk reactions to losses , trends are worth paying attention to , especially if they are negative , precipitous , and lengthy . 3 . -RRB- Know your spending habits . Have a very good grip on your budget process , and where you can squeeze out a little more to invest . Having good habits and keeping debt low entering retirement helps with the life of your investment also . 4 . -RRB- Do not put all of your eggs in one basket , or as you more commonly hear , diversify . Start a Roth IRA to balance out your taxable 401k ; Purchase an annuity or two to ensure a steady income stream that will not run out . Purchase some property that you can earn an income from during retirement ; invest in bonds and low maintenance mutual funds . 5 . -RRB- Plan for the inevitable medical expenses that come with age . The Law allows for a dedicated retirement account used exclusively for health care to be non-taxable , if health issues are likely , start one . Look at a life insurance policy that includes living benefit provisions , or look into long term care protection . If your company offers an HSA , enroll , and start paying into it . 6 . -RRB- Save , save , save . Find high yield savings accounts , and be certain to have an emergency account . Having one allows you to be able to not have to make withdrawals from your retirement funds , or acquire more debt . Having one allows you to be able to make investments that otherwise would only be dreams . The best way to alleviate worry is to trust ; Faith in the One who provides for us , and being a good steward of what we 're given allows us to sleep at night . Hopefully there are ideas here that will help you . Please feel free to contact me if you would like a more personal analysis of where you sit . A great question , and one I 'm glad that you asked . Thanks !
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 59 1/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
That is a great question ! In the technical sense , yes , 401k 's are a retirement plan . They were not originally designed to be the primary retirement vehicle though . Originally , they were designed to compliment the pension , or company retirement plan that you would receive from your employer . As time has passed , less and less companies offer pension plans , and turned to 401k 's as a way to offer a retirement option while not having the risk of paying you after you retire . They contribute a certain amount , but the risk of losses is strictly yours . As a result , many folks have seen their retirement funds disappear when the market has fared poorly . A 401k can be a valuable part of your retirement plan , but should not be the entirety of it . Please contact me , if you would like more details , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
That is a great question ! There are a million people that will line up to help you put together a plan . Some will honestly want to help you , and some will look at you like a wolf looks at a fat , three-legged sheep . Please be careful , and go with someone that comes with high recommendations . Here 's what you can do to get started . Take a few minutes , and decide what retirement looks like to you . Are you fishing , travelling , working , not working , debt free ? Now take a look at your current financial status . What do you need to do between here , and retirement to make that happen ? I tell people that if you want to live at your current standard of living in retirement , then you will want to have squirreled away between 8-10 times what your current salary is . If you want to live better than you are now , then you 've really got to get started . Once you 've got an idea of what you need to save , then you can talk to your HR person at work about company match 401k , or other programs they might offer ; You can talk to your insurance agent or banker and get some ideas , or you can find an advisor that can help you take a look at how to make your vision of retirement a comfortable reality . I hope that gives you an idea , feel free to drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Renewable Life Insurance Mean ?
A renewable policy is generally renewable for a specified period of time . During that period the insured can continue coverage regardless of health by paying the renewal premium . Renewal premiums are generally a great deal higher than the initial premium but might be a bargain if the insureds health has deteriorated in the meantime .
Renewable Life Insurance is life insurance that can be renewed when the policy ends . When the policy is renewed , coverage is extended for another set period of time at a higher rates . When annually renewable , the policy will be extended for one year at that price , then can be renewed the following year at a higher price if you so choose .
This one is easy to answer : do nothing . Yes , thats right . Virtually all term policies these days are guaranteed renewable . This means that you will retain coverage without going through underwriting again . So when it renews , you will get a bill for the renewed rate . Or , if your policy is on automatic bank draft , the renewal rate will be deducted from your bank account . Next question : what will the renewal rate be ? The thing is , you wont know until the policy renews . You will note on the data page of your policy that guaranteed maximum renewal rates are illustrated . These numbers can be very scary because they represent worst-case scenario rate increases . The actual renewal rates are determined when the contract renews , not when it is issued . Fortunately , actual renewal rates typically dont come close to these guaranteed maximum numbers . But they can be high . Once the premium guarantee period is over , the policy can renew at a rate much larger than the original premium . If the insurance carrier needs cash , or wants to bolster its reserves , or for any other reason wants more money , renewal term premiums are a good way to get it Is this bad ? Is this good ? It all depends . If the insured unfortunately has cancer , or some other very serious high risk factor , then even that high rate might seem like a bargain . If you still need life insurance , and you cant qualify for a better deal elsewhere , then even if you pay much more money in premium , the death benefit can still be worth it . But if fortunately you are healthy and do not have high risk factors in your lifestyle , then you just might qualify for a better rate with another company . Go for it ! Just make sure you get prequalified so you know before applying that the change would be in your favor . And very important : dont drop your current policy until the new one is in force . You want to avoid a gap in coverage .
Term insurance comes with many option . First , consider the reason for buying the insurance and find a product that meets that need . If you are covering a mortgage for example you might want to consider a 20 or 30 year term policy . There are two options here . Decreasing or Mortgage term or level term . I prefer level term due to the fact that many people do not remain in the same home for the life of the mortgage any more . There are policies that will add mortgage disability and Return of Premium . Next , how long will I need this coverage , 1 year , 5 years , ten years ? Also , what is my budget ? With term insurance the shorter the term the less the initial premium , so a on year term will be less than a 20 year term , at least initially . Every time the policy renews , the premium will increase . Is the policy renewable and convertible . Renewable means that you can renew the policy at the end of the term even if your health gets bad . Convertible means that you can convert the policy , or part of the policy to a whole life plan , regardless of health . If you need to keep the insurance for a lengthy period of time I highly recommend a policy that is renewable and convertible . A good agent can help you determine your best choice for your individual situation .
Whether you can renew term life insurance depends on a few things . Most insurers offer guaranteed renewable term insurance up to a certain age such as 70 , 75 and in some cases 80 . That does n't mean that you can renew it at the same premium amount as you had the first time ! The premium amount is adjusted upward for every year you live . If yours is not a guaranteed renewable you may have to qualify according to your health condition as well in order to renew or buy a new policy . These are some of the reasons it 's better to buy Whole Life or convert your term to whole life while it 's available and relatively affordable .
What is renewable and convertible term insurance ? Well , first thing , if you 're going to buy term insurance it should be both renewable and convertible . Renewable means the coverage will be offered to you up till the policy term runs out . The price can and will vary over time , they can not cancel you , except for non payment , but they can raise prices over time . Convertible is important in case your need for life insurance goes longer than you expect . Most people at some point realize they have a lifetime life insurance need . Convertible means you can move into a permanent insurance product without having to prove good health .
Annual renewable term is a Term Life policy that will allow you to renew it each year without having to go through additional underwriting or medical exams . It does not guarantee that the premium will remain the same . In fact usually the illustration will show you the scheduled increases in premiums per year or per 5 years . It also does not guarantee that you can renew it every year forever ! Most term policies will not allow you to renew past age 75 no matter what you are willing to pay .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
Renewable and convertible term life insurance policies have features that allow you to do the following . 1 -RRB- Renewable . This means that you can renew your policy to last beyond the term period that you purchased . E.g A 10 year term policy may be renewable to age 80 , with the premium going up each year after the original 10 year period ends . Prices usually jump up drastically after the term ends , so the premium may not be affordable , and will keep going up . But if you only need your policy another year or two , having a renewable option can be helpful . 2 -RRB- Convertible . This feature enables you to convert your life insurance policy to permanent insurance within a certain amount of time . The window for converting is generally a set number of years , or to a certain age . The conversion rate will be based on prices for that policy at the time of conversion , and on your age at the time of conversion . Since permanent insurance costs more than term insurance , and being older increases prices , this also may not be an affordable option . However , conversion premiums are based on the health rating you got at the time your original term policy was issued . Therefore , if you have had a change of health since you took out your term policy , being able to convert it to permanent can be a good option to have .
Yes generally term insurance policies end or expire at a certain age . The exact age depends on the particular policy , but age 85 is common . Term insurance polices are often renewable and convertible . That means that they renew for a higher premium at the end of each term 10,20 , or 30 for example . It also means that up tp a specified age you can convert them to a level premium permanent insurance plan that does not expire before you do . An independent life insurance broker representing several companies can help you find the right policy at the right price .
YRT means Yearly Renewable Term . So it 's a Term insurance good for one year and guaranteed renewable . That is up to a certain age , usually 80 years . However the premium does go up every year as dictated by the mortality table . So if a person in their 20s starts a YRT the premium may actually Not increase on the 2nd or 3rd year - or at least not more than a couple dollars . But if a person in their 40s or 50 starts a YRT you can count on the premium increasing significantly each year it is renewed . That 's just how Term works .
A claim may result in a notice to non-renew . This would happen if the home is exposed to a hazard that has not been mitigated . If your home is on a bluff overlooking the Pacific Ocean and part of the bluff falls into the ocean , your current insurance company might decide to non-renew . If you can demonstrate to either your current company or a subsequent company that you have taken adequate steps to eliminate that danger , you should be able to secure coverage . The other reason that a policy might non-renew might be moral . If you have attempted to defraud the company or shown negligence in maintaining the property , they might chose to non-renew . That doesnt mean that another insurance company might not insure you . Large brokerages frequently have the capacity to insure really difficult risks .
I am assuming you mean Whole Life Insurance . Term insurance is life insurance . Term insurance is pure insurance . There is no cash value and it is in force for a limited amount of time , the term of the policy . A one year term must be renewed after one year , five year term after five years and so on . Each term period renewal the premium will go up based on the persons age at renewal . Eventually term insurance becomes unaffordable . Whole Life is designed to be in force until you die . The premiums never go up because they are averaged out over a persons expected lifetime . As a result , initially the premium is higher than term insurance . The excess premium is invested and a cash value fund is built into the policy . Whole life is designed for permanent needs . Term insurance for temporary needs .
That means that the policy automatically renews each year without any underwriting . Typically all term products have the annual renewable option . The pricing is dependent upon which product you choose . If you select a 20 year term policy , the premium is the same for 20 years and then the policy will automatically renew at the premium required at the age you are after 20 years . If you have a life insurance illustration from your agent , you will see what the premium is every year even after the `` term '' has expired .
Many term life insurance policies are renewable to age 80 or 90 . Unless you have some type of rider that guarantees renewability at reasonable rates , your premium during the renewal period will jump sky high . And of course , if you are still alive when the renewable period ends , you may be unable to find a new policy , especially if you have developed a serious health condition . Rather than allow your term policy to enter the renewable period , it is usually a better option to convert part or all of your term insurance to permanent insurance while you can -LRB- if you indeed want your life insurance to continue -RRB- . Not all policies are convertible , and if they are , they will have strict guidelines as to how long you have to convert them to permanent insurance . So check on these features long before your term will end . In essence , converting will allow you to keep the same health rating you had when you applied for your term policy , regardless of your health at the time of conversion . The rates will be higher because you are older , and because you will be paying premiums for permanent insurance . However , they may not be as high as the renewable rates would have been , and your rates after converting often are locked in for your lifetime .
Guaranteed renewable disability insurance is a policy that is guaranteed to be renewed as long as premiums are paid . However , having a guaranteed renewable disability insurance policy does not guarantee that the premiums will not go up . In order to lock in the premiums for a disability policy , it must be both non-cancellable and non-renewable .
Renewable Life Insurance is life insurance that can be renewed when the policy ends . When the policy is renewed , coverage is extended for another set period of time at a higher rates . When annually renewable , the policy will be extended for one year at that price , then can be renewed the following year at a higher price if you so choose .
Term Life Insurance is not usually renewable to a second term , but it can be . Some companies offer renewable term regularly ; others do not offer it at all . When the term ends , many companies do change the premium to annually renewable term , however . That means the premium is locked in for one year only .
An auto insurance carrier can not drop you mid term during a policy period unless you fail to make your premium payments or if you lied on your application . Now keep in mind , polices are self terminating . So when you purchase a 6 month policy for example , after the 6 months the policy self terminates . At renewal the insurance carrier will chose to offer you or not offer you a renewal , or another 6 months of insurance if they have determined the risk -LRB- that would be you the policy holder -RRB- have exceeded their risk tolerance . Each time you come up for renewal the insurance company will review you -LRB- the risk -RRB- and determine if you are a good risk or not . Then the insurance company will either offer you a renewal or chose not to offer you a renewal . It 's the insurance companies choice .
Yes . Most insurance policies will renew indefinitely upon the designated renewal period , unless something happens . Some examples of things that can happen that will cease the automatic renewal are : you cancel your policy ; you do n't pay your premium ; you make a lot of claims and your insurance company submits a letter of non-renewal ; you committed fraud and the insurance company cancels the policy . These are just a few of the reasons a policy might cease . However , absent some type of notice your policy will renew . I hope this helps .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Pay For Accidental Death ?
Life insurance generally pays out death proceeds to the policy beneficiary at the death of the policy insured , no matter what the cause of death is.The exception is suicide during the first two years of the contract known as the contestability period and fraud resulting from misstatements or omissions .
Yes , Life Insurance pays for accidental death or death due to natural causes . Death due to natural causes is death due to and illness or internal malfunction of the body not caused by external forces . Death due to unnatural causes is called accidental death . Life insurance covers all types of death except suicide in the first two years .
Yes , Basic Life Insurance does cover accidental death , as well as death due to natural causes -LRB- i.e. illness , old age -RRB- . You sometimes have the option to put an Accidental Death rider on a basic life insurance policy . This increases the amount that would be paid to your beneficiary if you died accidentally , as opposed to dying from natural causes . Usually accidental death riders are offered in options of multiples of your basic death benefit . E.g. Your policy would pay $ 100,000 if you died of illness . But with the Accidental Death rider it would pay 2 times that amount , or $ 200,000 , if your death was due to an accident of some sort . However , without that rider , the policy would still pay $ 100,000 for death due to accident OR natural causes .
Accidental Life Insurance -LRB- usually called Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance -RRB- is relatively inexpensive because death due to accident is relatively infrequent . If you were on a very tight budget where you had to choose between Life insurance or Accidental Death insurance , I would suggest owning a small Life insurance policy would be worth more than having a large Accidental Death policy , because the chance of passing due to illness is so much greater than the chance of dying accidentally . However , if you are not on a very tight budget , the low price of Accidental Death insurance makes it a somewhat painless addition to one 's Life insurance portfolio .
Accidental death insurance costs less than life insurance because death by accident occurs far less frequently than death due to natural causes . Even accidents that are caused by health conditions are not covered by accidental death insurance . Also , you can not get accidental death insurance at older ages . To find the price of accidental death insurance , you can contact an agency that sells life insurance . Most offer a stand alone accidental death policy , or can add an AD&D rider to your life insurance policy .
Life insurance pays the death benefit if the insured person passes away due to natural causes or accidental death . If you want the policy to pay double in case of accidental death and your policy does not do that as a feature of the policy , you may be able to purchase an accidental death rider . That way if death occurred to accident , the policy and the rider would , resulting in double payment for accidental death .
No it is two separate things . An accidental death policy also called AD&D -LRB- Accidental Death and Dismemberment -RRB- only pays a benefit to the beneficiary if theinsuredis killed accidentally . These policies are usually very inexpensive and guarantee issue underwriting . A full life insurance policy covers all types of deaths including accidental death . The only exception is on suicide which all most all policies have a two year exclusion for that cause of death . An accidental rider can be added to most life insurance policies very inexpensively to double the face amount in case of an accidental death as well .
For life insurance , accidental death would be the result of anything sudden and unexpected that caused the death of the insured . An automobile accident is an example as well as a plane crash . Certainly a death caused by the accidental discharge of a firearm would be considered as accidental . That would be contrasted with a death by suicide which would not only not be considered accidental , but woudl be a reason for the isuring company to deny paying the proceeds of the policy . A death caused by a genuine accidental overdose or unknowingly combining of medications that together can cause harm could certainly be an example of accidental death as well .
I believe you 're referring to AD&D policies -LRB- accidental death and dismemberment -RRB- . Every life insurance policy covers accidental death . Traditional life insurance policies provide full coverage -LRB- paying out proceeds in the event death occurs by illness or injury -RRB- . Partial coverage policies only covering accidental deaths are known as Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- life insurance programs . These policies typically feature much lower premiums than full coverage programs , but only pay out a death benefit if death occurs under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. dying in a car accident -RRB- . If you only have an AD&D policy and you die due to a heart attack , the policy would not pay out any proceeds because that would be considered death due to illness . Even though the premiums are less with AD&D policies , it 's worth paying the premiums for a full coverage life insurance policy because individuals are most likely to die due to illness than they will by injury .
Life insurance differs from AD&D in that Life Insurance pays for death by any reason , whereas AD&D only pays for death by accidental reasons . AD&D stands for Accidental Death and Dismemberment . If the death is due to falling down stairs , car accident , etc , the policy will pay the death benefit . And some policies also pay for the loss of an extremity . But if death was due to illness -LRB- even an accident caused by illness , such as driving into a tree while suffering a heart attack -RRB- , the policy will not pay . Life insurance covers both types of death : natural and accidental .
There really is not a type of life insurance called Accidental Life insurance , although that is not a bad title because many people who buy it `` accidentally '' believe that it is Life insurance . Accidental Death insurance is a policy that will pay the beneficiary if the insured person dies as the result of an accident . Accidental death is death `` caused by an unforeseen circumstance unrelated to the body '' . Therefore , an accidental death policy would not pay , e.g. , for a traffic fatality that occurred due to a heart attack while driving .
Every life insurance policy covers accidental death . Traditional life insurance policies provide full coverage -LRB- paying out proceeds in the event death occurs by illness or injury -RRB- . Partial coverage policies only covering accidental deaths are known as Accidental Death & Dismemberment life insurance programs . These policies typically feature much lower premiums than full coverage programs , but only pay out a death benefit if death occurs under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. dying in a car accident -RRB- . If you only have an AD&D policy and you die due to a heart attack , the policy would not pay out any proceeds because that would be considered death due to illness . Even though the premiums are less with AD&D policies , it 's worth paying the premiums for a full coverage life insurance policy because individuals are most likely to die due to illness than they will by injury .
Life Insurance will cover any type of death not specifically excluded . Natural death would definitely be covered , as well as accidental death . Within the two year incontestability period , conditions not mentioned on the application and suicide would not be covered . Death in commision of a crime is usually not covered and some policies exclude death as a result of combat . Do not confuse an Accidental Death policy with a Life insurance policy . Accidental death policies only cover accidental death . I have had some clients confused on this issue .
Double indemnity means that in the event of death by accidental means the policy will pay double the face amount . It is actually a wedding equal amount of life insurance and accidental death insurance . The premium for accidental death insurance is quite low as few deaths meet the definition . The problem that double indemnity creates is the illusion that those who a person loves are going to be well cared for , when in fact the accidental death portion is unlikely to pay .
AD&D Insurance stands for Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance . AD&D Insurance pays for death that occurs by accident , or for accidental dismemberment . Life Insurance , on the other hand , pays for accidental death AND for death that occurs due to natural causes . Life Insurance pays for death by any reason except for suicide in the first two years of the policy , and some exceptions such as acts of war , as spelled out in the policy .
An Accidental Death and Dismemberment policy is a life insurance product . It can come in two different forms . There are term and permanent life insurance policies that offer AD&D as a rider to the life insurance to increase the face amount proceeds in case of accidental death . The dismemberment pays on a schedule depending on the limbs effected . There are also AD&D standalone policies that only cover an accidental death or dismemberment . The plus side of these polices usually require little or no underwriting which gives ill people an opportunity to have some life insurance coverage were as they may not qualify for any other type of life insurance . They are also very affordable premiums . The downside is the odds of dying accidental versus dying from an illness are very very high . This is why they are easy and cheap , because the odds are in the life insurance companies favor not to pay a claim .
No . Accidental death insurance pays only if you die from a specified , defined accident whereas the basic life insurance policy covers death by any cause , at any time in any place - except for suicide within first 2 policy years -LRB- 1 year in some states -RRB- . Accidental death insurance does serve a purpose , especially for young people because accidents are the leading cause of death for young people . Many accidental death policies for children are not available to applicants 15 years or older due to the huge and deadly track record of teenage drivers .
Yes , life insurance does pay for natural death -LRB- death due to natural causes such as illness or old age -RRB- . Accidental death insurance does not pay for natural death . Graded life insurance policies will pay a reduced amount for the first 1-3 years for natural death , depending on the features of the policy . After the graded period has passed , graded policies will also pay 100 % for death due to any reason , including natural death .
Yes , life insurance covers death by cancer . A person who purchases a life insurance policy must honestly present their health details at the time of applying , and the insurance company may order medical records . After that , the policy is approved to cover death by all reasons , except suicide in the first two years . Sometimes people will opt for a rider that excludes death due to being a pilot . But there is rarely an exclusion for cancer . Unlike Accidental Death Insurance that covers only accidental death , Life Insurance covers death by all accidental AND natural causes , including cancer .
With the exception the insured dying at the hands of the beneficiary , the insured committing suicide in the first two years of a policy , and any contractual war clause exemptions ; life insurance pays the death claim whether by accident , disease or natural causes like old age . Accidental death or AD&D -LRB- accidental death and dismemberment -RRB- pays only accidents not disease . AD&D is less expensive because the actuarial accidental death statistics are so much lower than death caused by disease .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does Guaranteed Universal Life Insurance Work ?
How does Guaranteed Universal Life work ? Just like level term . Think of it as lifetime level term . With term insurance you pay a premium every month and you have coverage . With GUL you pay the premium every month and you have coverage . The GUL rider on a polcy states that as long as the premium is paid and the policy values remain untouched the company will pay a death claim out to the age chosen by the insured . It could be to age 90 , 100 , 110 , 121 or until passing . The big thing with a GUL vs. a Level term policy is cash values . With level term the insured does not see the cash values generated by the level term policy during it 's level premium run . With level term you overpay early to underpay later and this keeps the premium constant . Same with GUL except now you can ` touch '' the money inside the policy . This is a bad thing if you want the guarantee to remain in place . You simply do not want to mess with your GUL beyond paying your monthly premium every month . GUL is NOT a saving plan ... it is Lifetime TERM , or at least , it should be treated that way .
Guaranteed Universal Life insurance -LRB- GUL -RRB- is universal life insurance that guarantees that the policy will not lapse when consistently paying a specific premium that is guaranteed to not go up . The guaranteed no lapse period can often be chosen . E.g. you might choose the policy not to lapse to your age 90 , or to be safe , to your age 120 . The guaranteed premium is based on what it would take to keep that policy in effect that long at the minimum guaranteed interest rate , and the maximum COI -LRB- cost of insurance -RRB- .
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The same companies that carry Term Life Insurance often carry Universal Life Insurance , and most agencies that sell Term also sell UL . When purchasing online , you will want to work with a licensed agent who has some experience , so they will understand the in 's and out 's of Universal Life . There are several types of Universal Life Insurance . Guaranteed UL allows you to lock in a level premium that will guarantee the policy to pay the death benefit to a certain age . This guarantee might be 20 years from now ; it might be to age 121 , or something different . It is important to select a guarantee to avoid the problems Universal Life presented in the past , when people bought while interest rates were high , and their policies started lapsing much earlier than anticipated when interest rates dropped . There are also many Universal Life policies that do not have `` no lapse '' guarantees . How long your coverage last relies on what the interest rate and cost of insurance are at any given time . Variable Universal Life allows you to invest in the stock market , with the potential for more growth -LRB- and more loss -RRB- than other UL policies . Indexed Universal Life allows you to take advantage of some modest gains by allocating premium to equity index accounts . While it does not have as much cash growth potential as VUL , it has much more protection from losses . Added to these are Survivor Universal Life policies off all types . These cover two people , and pay when the second person dies . Again , you 'll want to use an experienced agent when you buy UL . There are many knowledgeable agents on this website who can help you .
If you buy universal life insurance that offers a lifetime guaranteed level premium and level death benefit , there are few cons to universal life insurance . With those guarantees , it is a permanent policy , so it will usually have a higher premium than term . But it often has a lower premium than whole life . Also , guaranteed no lapse universal life policies do not usually have a lot of cash value , but for many people , that is a worthy trade off for the lower premium . If you get a universal life policy without guarantees , you need to be careful that your policy does not lapse before you want it to . If you purchase indexed universal life or variable universal life , you also need to manage the investments made within your policy . The con would be that many people assume their agent is managing their policy for them , and are dismayed when coverage ends or they have very little cash value to show for their years of premiums . If you understand your policy well and know how to manage it , being able to manage your own policy can be a pro rather than a con .
No . The guaranteed side simply means the coverage is guaranteed to remain in effect until that point as long as the premiums are continued to be paid at their current rate - as universal life insurance is defined as flexible premium coverage , you have the option to increase the premium you 're paying to extend the guarantee side . The current side determines when the coverage would actually run out - however , the current side is always subject to change as it reflects whatever the current interest rates are . If the interest rates change , then the current side will change as well . In addition , if the carrier raises their costs of insurance charges under the policy , then the cash value can be depleted even faster thus lowering the current side coverage projection even further . If you 're unsure what you have , you can contact the carrier to send you an up-to-date illustration -LRB- a coverage projection citing how long the coverage will remain in force based on today 's figures -RRB- . It sounds to me as though the policy that you have is a current assumption universal life program rather than a guaranteed universal life program -LRB- which can guarantee premiums remain fixed and guaranteed up to age 121 -RRB- . Current assumption policies typically have limited guarantees under their programs and require additional premiums if the cash value is depleted - meaning they will `` crash '' if the cash value hits $ 0 -LRB- you would therefore need to pay more in premiums above what you 're already spending to keep the coverage going or else it will lapse -RRB- . Guaranteed universal life policies state that even if the cash value hits $ 0 , the coverage will still continue as long as your regularly scheduled premiums are paid . If you prefer to have something that guarantees coverage for life rather than risking coverage lapsing after age 75 , you may want to consider setting up a guaranteed universal life policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on the insurer as to what Adjustable Life is . There were a couple of midwestern companies who had products with that moniker which were fixed premium adjustable life insurance products . Universal Life one of the dominant forms of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life which is the official name of the product . So , it may be that you are asking about Universal Life . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
While both universal life and whole life insurance are permanent products and have a death benefit the similarities end there . Whole life insurance has a guarantee premium for the life of the contract and generally is credited by a dividend or return of unused premium . Universal life gas four policy types : current assumption universal life , guaranteed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . With the exception of guaranteed universal life , the others have flexible premiums or death benefit that can be changed by the policy owner .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
There are five types of permanent life insurance policies : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Participating whole life and guaranteed universal life are used for indemnification planning . Participating whole life , with a max term rider and paid up additions rider can be used for income as can current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . The income design must conform to TAMRA and minimize the death benefit amount to optimize the crediting methodology .
Its really not a question of what is better . Its a question of knowing how to use the flexibility built into the product . Universal life insurance can accommodate flexible premium payments . At the same time , it makes available premium guarantees . If you overuse the flexibility of the product , you can lose the guarantees . A certain payment commitment must be made to the company if you want them to guarantee the coverage for a specified amount of time . If you overfund , then underfund , then stop paying , then start paying again , odds are you wont get the guarantee you want for the time you want . But if you are smart about it , you can have your cake and eat it too . You can take advantage of the flexibility of the product to come up with a creative funding strategy . So the flexibility is really best utilized in the design stage . Then , when you come up with a payment schedule that is suitable , you make your payment commitment . You stick with the program . What kind of payment strategies could you employee with this product ? The options are many . You could fund the policy with a single premium . Make a payment in year one , and then not make any at all . But you still get a lifetime guarantee . You could go to 10-year pay , or a 20-year pay , or 30 years pay scenario . Pay the premium for that period only , but still get a lifetime guarantee . These strategies allow you to on the one hand , not pay for your life insurance for the rest of your life . At the same time , they still give you the lifetime guaranteed coverage you want . Of course , you need to consult with your broker and the company to calculate the correct amounts needed to limit your payments but also get the guarantee . Then again , you could just go the route of continuously paying a premium on a yearly basis . You would have to keep paying , but the premium here would be much cheaper than the first two scenarios . So what is your priority ? Would it be the lowest annual outlay , or paying the premium for the shortest duration ? The flexibility of universal life gives you additional interesting options . You could structure the coverage for a defined amount of years . It could be 10 years , 20 years , or 30 years . The premium and the death benefit could be guaranteed for that amount of time . After that , you lose the guarantee . Why would somebody do that ? Why wouldnt they just buy term insurance ? Well , in many cases underwriting concessions are made for permanent insurance that you dont get with term insurance . The price for universal life could actually be lower than term insurance . As a matter of fact , sometimes carriers will offer only universal life insurance and not term insurance . The flexibility of this product can really enable you to make your life insurance work to your best advantage . You just have to know how to use it .
Universal Life is a form of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life . This is the official name of this type of product . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
Flexible premium adjustable life is the more antiquated title of universal life . Today , there are four different universal life polices. : current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . These three is feature the flexibility or adjust-ability of premiums and death benefit amounts . Guaranteed universal life , in general terms , does not have this flexible feature based on it 's secondary guarantees .
There are two types of life insurance : Term and Permanent life insurance . Term life insurance is for a time certain period of coverage to indemnify your beneficiaries from financial liability . Permanent life insurance is for ongoing financial liabilities that may never terminate . Depending upon your age term life insurance issues at guaranteed periods of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life insurances can mature up to age 121 and some polices actually isle the life of the insured . Permanent life insurance can be classified into two categories : Par whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life has four policy platforms : Guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Universal Life insurance is a combination of term life insurance and a tax-deferred savings plan paying a variable return . There is a guaranteed interest rate and cost of insurance set which stipulates how long the policy is guaranteed to last . This can be as long as age 121 with some UL products , so that the policy is then considered permanent insurance . Some Universal Life products , especially Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life , are designed to generate cash value . They may or may not have a guaranteed lifetime no lapse feature . Universal Life is an adjustable and flexible policy that can often be tweaked to meet the needs of the insured over a lifetime .
Heres a simple model for you . I am sure you know about term insurance . This is a product designed to give you the absolutely lowest premium for a certain amount of time . The premium and death benefit could be guaranteed from 10 to 30 years . No cash will be accumulated for your use . -LRB- Of course , that is one big reason why the premium is so low -RRB- . The problem we all face with term insurance is that once the guarantee period is over , the price typically skyrockets . I have actually see the premium increase tenfold at the time of renewal ! Now lets suppose that you could have something that would act like permanent term insurance . The premium would be as low as can possibly be . No cash would be accumulated . But the price would never go up . You would have , in essence , a lifetime guarantee . That , my friend , is called guaranteed universal life insurance . Whole life insurance is very similar . Guaranteed premium . Guaranteed death benefit . Lifelong coverage . The big difference is that whole life insurance also emphasizes cash accumulation . It provides very strong guarantees on the cash . So it costs a lot more than guaranteed universal life insurance . It should be noted that providing a lifetime guarantee is only one of a variety of uses for universal life insurance . It is a flexible product and can be designed to accumulate cash as well . It can also be designed to accommodate a variety of premium payments . But when the financial planning objective is to secure a lifetime coverage at the lowest possible guaranteed cost , there is no better product .
Guaranteed premium life insurance is a life insurance policy in which you get a contractual guarantee that the premium will not change . It will not increase , and it will not decrease . That is a very good deal . You do not want to have to worry about your premium changing . This product is , after all , supposed to be the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it should be dependable . Virtually all life insurance products available now provide premium guarantees . Its really just a question of how long the guarantee will last . Term insurance gives you guarantees for a specified amount of time . Could be 10 years , 15 , 20 , 30 , etc. . After that , watch out . The price could go skyhigh . Universal life could also give you guarantees for a specified amount of time . The interesting thing about this product is that since it has a flexible premium , you can determine how long you want that guarantee . It could last from a few years , to your lifetime . You can kind of make it function as permanent term insurance . No guaranteed cash accumulation , but a lifetime guarantee on the premium . And on the death benefit , by the way . Whole life typically comes with a lifetime guarantee on the premium . Thats the way the product is designed . I think you can appreciate that the longer you want the guarantee , the higher will be the premium . You get what you pay for . There you go . What else do you need to know ?
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Buy Term Life Insurance ?
Term Life Insurance can be purchased from any company for it is life insurance except that term insurance is only for a specified period of 10 , 15 , 25 , or 30 years depending on policy . Term insurance cost less but does not build a cash value and is not until the life of the policyholder . However , term insurance is still a great benefit . I also specialize in term insurance . I know of many other coverages that are added to term policies in order to make then more unique and beneficial such as child riders and other income options .
To buy Term life insurance , you must start out finding the policy for which you want to apply . You can go to websites that have free quote engines to start your search . If instant quotes are provided , you can change the face amount and term length to get an idea of prices . Then talk to an agent or representative of that website to confirm the best policy for your particular age , gender , build , smoking status , health , and other risk factors . Once you have selected a policy , you can complete an application by paper or online . Some policies do not require an exam , while others will require a free life insurance exam . When everything has been completed and the underwriter has had time to review your exam -LRB- sometimes , the insurance company will also order your medical records -RRB- , they will approve your policy at a certain rating . With our agency , if that rating is higher than we expected , we help you adjust the policy to fit your budget . Once the first premium is paid , your policy is in effect and locked in for the length of your Term policy .
The most common way to purchase term life insurance is by filling out an application , either prompted by a broker or an online application which may or may not be initiated by a broker . The application length depends on the insurance company you are applying with , whether or not it is a simplified issue or fully underwritten policy . A pa ramedical may or may not be required .
If you are considering term insurance please ask yourself these questions . How old am I ? If I buy 20 year term now how old will I be when I have to buy another policy ? Does it meet your needs to buy term life considering the objective of the policy ? The purpose of term has always been to allow the purchaser to invest the difference between the cost of term life and permanent coverage . How much are you `` investing '' now ? Every policy you have means you are paying `` administrative costs '' for that policy . What if you have one good size permanent policy purchased at your current age to meet all your life insurance needs or can you buy a term life and then be able to meet your financial objectives and not have to buy another life insurance policy ? Finally , you need to have a personal advisor that puts your needs first and has the integrity to make recommendations based on your TOTAL financial plan and not some life insurance agent pedaling life insurance
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
There are different schools of thought on how long you need life insurance . Some believe that you only need life insurance until you save up enough so that your dependents would do OK , even if your died prematurely . That philosophy is often called , `` buy Term , invest the rest . '' Those who like this idea tend to buy shorter terms and pay as little as possible for their life insurance , with the hopes that by the time their Term policy ends , they will not need to buy more . Some choose the age of retirement as their cutoff point for owning life insurance , with the intention of having all debts paid off and money for retirement saved up by then . On the opposite side of the fence are those who would use life insurance for a lot of their supplemental income and security in later life , and thus only buy permanent policies . Not only do they spend more on premiums than those who buy Term only , but they may even increase their premiums so that their policies are paid up by the time they retire . Many people fall somewhere in between . They buy what is most cost effective for each particular need . E.g. . They may buy Term for the bigger expenses in their lives , such as getting their kids raised . And they might buy a smaller Whole or Universal Life policy for their final expense needs . Then try to diversify their investments as is prudent at each stage of their lives , and in accordance with the economy , and products offered at that time .
Pure Term Life insurance has premiums that increase every year as you get older . Most people do n't like a premium that goes up every year so they decide how long they need the insurance and level out the premiums by buying level premium term . When you do this you are paying extra in the earlier years in order to level out the premium in the later years of your level premium period . That is why 1-year term is much cheaper than 20-year term . When you buy term life insurance , you should determine how long you want the premium to be level and buy it for that length . For instance if your mortgage is paid off in 18-more years , you should buy a 20-year level term policy if the mortgage payoff is the reason for the insurance .
There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for . This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There are two financially oriented universes : an insurance planning universe , and a financial planning universe . In the former , it never makes sense to buy term and those that live in that universe will give you an infinite number of reasons why - in the long run - it is a waste of your money . If you buy term , you will be called a `` termite '' . In the latter , term insurance - or permanent insurance - are viewed asfinancial vehicles that can be used to achieve a certain objective or several objectives at once , through leveraging : paying `` small '' dollars now for `` large '' dollars later . It 's called `` using the right tool for the job '' . Neither universe is right or wrong , although I would imagine you know which universe I come from . The point is to stay fixed on how much death benefit -LRB- coverage or face amount -RRB- you need and for how long . The way I see it , one needs term when they have a high need and a low budget , and a type of permanent insurance policy for when they eventually die . In other words , you need both . I recommend buying term in the higher amount that you need early in life -LRB- wife , kids , education , mortgage , etc. -RRB- for the period of time you are most likely to need it -LRB- 20-30 years -RRB- , but at the same time , buy a small face amount of permanent insurance to cover final expenses , projecting forward a nice , long lifetime and what it will probably cost to put you in a box , or reduce your mass through pyric methodolgies and put you in an urn . Allow for other final expenses , such as possible debt , medical expenses not covered by insurance , and a little `` transitional money '' for those you leave behind . That way , when your term runs out , you 'll have only the permanent plan to pay premium on , and , if you design it prudently , you might find that your final expense policy no longer needs any premium when your term runs out . You 'll need an experienced and knowledgeable agent from the appropriate universe to put this together for you so that it fits your budget . Final note : As has been appropriately mentioned in an answer above , be sure to purchase only `` fully convertible term '' for the reasons cited therein .
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
Term Life is a non-cash value life insurance plan that can be used very effectively for financial planning matching the policy to 10 year objectives , 20 year objectives , or 30 year objectives . When term life was first introduced it was justified by `` buy term and invest the difference '' . In other words save money by buying term and then select an aggressive growth mutual fund or if you prefer a savings account and when the term has expired for the purpose of the `` term life policy '' you do not want to have to buy term again because now you will be 10 , 20 , or 30 years older and since buying life insurance is a factor of what is the liklihood of your deatn I am sure you understand the older we get the higher the risk of our death
When to buy permanent life insurance ? That is a good question . Some agents recommend buying permanent life insurance for every policy . Some financial consultants recommend never buying permanent life insurance . Both have some valid justifications , but both are rather extreme positions . In real life , with budget limitations , health risks , bear markets , and other considerations , it is hard for me to recommend only one option . Not everyone can afford all the life insurance they need in permanent coverage . Yet buying only term presents the risk of being unable to qualify for a new policy when the current one expires . Putting money in the stock market and savings plans should cover final expense needs , eliminating the need for permanent life insurance . But will those investments and savings be there when you die ? My recommendations are to buy Term insurance for temporary needs , and Permanent insurance for lifelong needs . Specifically , permanent insurance is best for final expense needs such as funeral , burial , paying off credit cards , and other costs associated with putting the deceased to rest . Permanent insurance is recommended if you want to use the policy proceeds to pay estate taxes , pass money to heirs , or bequeath money to a charity . If you use term insurance for any purpose that may find you `` outliving the term '' , you may find that you no longer qualify for a new policy , and that all your plans for your life insurance are moot .
When you buy life insurance to cover a mortgage , you can buy your policy in the face amount and term length that you want . Often , that is 30 year term to cover a 30 year mortgage . About 20 years down the road you may have half your mortgage paid off . At that time you could reduce your life insurance policy to half the face amount and save some money . Or you could start out taking half of your coverage in 30 year Term and half in 20 year Term . Buying the shorter term policy will save you some money and when it runs out , you still have 10 years of coverage left . All this is to say , you really ca n't know how much mortgage life insurance costs until you talk to an agent and figure out the best way to set up your policy . Give someone who sells level Term life insurance today ; you will be glad you took the time .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is : What does term life insurance cover ? Remember first of all , if we 're using term , it only covers that period in time . If you buy a 20-year term , as an example , it 's only going to cover you for 20 years . If you buy $ 1/2 million dollars of death benefit , you 'll have it for as long as you pay your premiums on time ; you 'll have that coverage . What is it good for ? How does it cover ? It 's going to cover anything that you think that you need . Let 's say , at $ 1/2 million , you had a mortgage at $ 250,000 , you had credit card debt , you had car debt , you had educational debt . You want to cover that so that your spouse or your beneficiaries will not be actually saddled with your debt if something happened to you . When I 'm looking at , ` What does term life insurance ? ' it 's the time zone , how long do I have , what obligations would I have , and how can I relieve my beneficiaries from any of those obligations if something happens to me ?
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
I have been covered under automobile insurance with the same company for years , i 'm changing companies and i 've already provided the declaration page to my new insurance company but they stated they need proof of coverage faxed to them . What else could I send
They might be looking for evidence of insurance . This is a form provided by your new insurance company . They might be looking for the Insurance ID cards provided with your policy . They might be trying to be difficult , in which case your state insurance commissioner would be someone interested in your plight .
In Connecticut , where I have been licensed since 1985 , if an insurance company needs to have proof of prior continuous insurance coverage , the declaration sheet is the preferred and universally accepted document to certify such proof . In fact , most companies co n't accept just an Insurance ID Card because they are not considered to be as strong a document . If by chance you let your old policy lapse so that there is a gap in coverage , that might be the cause of the problem . There is no reason I can think of in my experience why a valid in force declaration sheet would not be acceptable as proof of prior coverage . You could go to the Insurance Commissioner as previously suggested , but it also may be worth reconsidering your move in the first place .
A declaration page would show coverage had been purchased , when it had been purchased and when it would expire . However I would not accept a declaration page as proof of Renters Insurance or any insurance for that matter . I would not accept it because there is no guarantee that the Insured or Renter will make the next payment for the policy . If he does n't , the policy would cancel and you wo n't know . If I want proof that coverage is in force , I would request a Certificate of Insurance and I would also request I be named as Certificate Holder . If I 'm named Certificate Holder , the insurance company may -LRB- depends on State Regulations -RRB- be obligated to tell you when coverage is threatened to be canceled . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Located near the front of the policy , the declaration page lists the information that personalizes the coverage found in the following pages . It also lists all the forms that comprise the policy . This is sort of a table of contents . Your mortgage company will want a copy of this page of your policy . You should review it carefully as it contains a great deal of very important information When you look at the declaration page you can identify the name of the insurance company . Agents often represent multiple companies and this tells you exactly which company is insuring your home . Here you will find the policy number which represents the individual nature of the contract . The declaration page will describe the type of policy . There are several different forms of homeowners policies and this will tell you which form is being used . The declaration page will identify who is being insured . This is very important , particularly when there is a liability claim . The named insured should read like the deed to the property . The property should be clearly identified . There may be more than one insured and their relationship is often included in the declaration . This is where the mortgage company will be identified and the address of the company will be included , along with the loan number . Additional mortgagees can also be listed here with the same information . The name and address of the agent handling the policy also appears in the same general area . This is where you can go for service on the policy . The declarations make very important statements setting the coverage limits . While they are often identified by letters -LRB- A-M -RRB- there will be definitions in the subsequent pages . This shows the limit of each of the coverages in the policy . It usually shows the limit of liability . It usually shows the deductible applied to property claims , and states the annual premium for the policy . There is a lengthy list of forms that comprise the bulk of the policy . These attached pages detail exactly the nature and extent of the coverages , and the limits and exclusions that apply . As a homeowner you should look down this list and ask the agent to explain any coverage that you dont understand . This can trigger conversations about additional available coverages that might be appropriate for you and which you should have . This is a very important section and one that you dont want to overlook . After this is usually a general description of the property itself . It will identify the fire district , location of the nearest fire hydrant , proximity to a fire station and the protection class used to develop the premium . It will probably comment on the roof and indicate if there is any special rating applied . The company has relied on this information much of which youre provided and it should be correct . It is quite likely that your state has laws that require certain notifications to be on the declaration page , perhaps warning you that the policy does not cover flood , earthquake or building code upgrade coverage . Finally the declaration page will identify the company , its address , telephone number and state who is paying the premium and the address where communications are being sent .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Coverage A-Dwelling , on your declaration page is the amount of money your home is insured for against covered perils . How much should your limit be ? It should be the amount of money you need to rebuild your house from scratch . That amount of money is called Replacement Cost . How do you determine the Replacement Cost Value ? To determine the Replacement Cost Value , you need to know or measure the square footage of your home . You also need to know the special features of your home , like skylights , central vacuums , etc. . You also need to know the quality of your improvements . For example , are your kitchen and bathroom fixtures Builders Grade or Luxury ? If you can gather that information , call your agent and review it with them . They should be able to help you come up with a reasonable estimate of your homes replacement value . You should revisit the value every three to five years or after you make a significant improvement . You want to keep pace with your homes value , but you dont want to over insurance and waste money . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
I love this question ! The answer is found all over the internet . Yes , the same internet that you used to buy insurance . Look at the reviews on Yelp and others to see what kind of feedback -LRB- complaints -RRB- people are posting . The moment you begin to choose your insurance based solely on the price , you 'll begin to run into problems . Claims not handled to your satisfaction and the inability to get anyone on this continent to talk to you about it . You may save a few bucks when you purchase your insurance but you 'll lose in the long run . A good agent does something a website can never do ... care . If you have a problem with the way my company handles a claim you can walk right into my office and talk with me , and I 'll listen and do whatever I can to make you happy . I 'm accountable for the services that I provide . Flo or the Gecko will try to sell you on the idea that all insurance is the same and the price is the only thing that matters . Nothing could be further from the truth . Will Flo tell you that you 're grossly underinsured and , god forbid , you get sued , you could be paying for the rest of your life ? Nope . But a good agent will , and it probably would n't cost that much more . The internet has n't made the insurance agent obsolete . On the contrary , it proves why you need a good one . Insurance is n't a simple point and click product . There are many different aspects that fit together to make it work for you , and it 's different for everyone . I 've never had a client tell me I 'm overcharging them after we 've rebuilt their home . Will the lizard show up at your home at 2am when your house is still burning ? I have , it 's what I owe my clients . There are bad agents out there , I 'll admit . I 've met quite a few . However , most good agents take their responsibility seriously and they truly care about their clients . So , in summary , agents are necessary only if you want someone who cares about covering your family correctly .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from InsuranceLibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is term life insurance better than permanent life insurance ? '' Well , did you hear the two words in there ? One is term and one is permanent . When I 'm looking at term insurance , I 'm looking at obligations . I 'm looking at liabilities that I may that are temporal that they are not forever . And so I 'm going to look at term insurance to cover those ideas , those indemnification needs , and if I have permanent needs them I 'm going have to look at different forms of life insurance that are permanent . It could be Par Whole Life . It could Current Assumption UL . It could be Indexed Universal Life . It could be Variable Life , depending upon what my propensity for risks are , but I 'm always looking , is this a temporary expense reimbursement ? Or is this a permanent need that will never go away ? It 's never not is term insurance better or worse than permanent ? It 's the issue of the need . Well , that 's our consumer question for the day . If you have any questions just submit them to www.InsuranceLibrary.com .
Eyeglasses are personal property and the Renters Policy pays for personal property damaged by covered perils so in that sense , yes , eyeglasses are covered by the Renters Policy . They would also be covered by a Homeowner Policy and a Condo Policy . However , all those policies come with a deductible . A deductible is money you pay toward a claim . The insurance company pays the excess . Say , for example , it costs $ 300 to replace glasses that were damaged by a covered peril , like a fire . If you had a $ 250 deductible , you would only recover $ 50 . I would suggest , you not submit the claim . Most insurance companies have a threshold of two claims in three years . After two claims in three years , your policy will not be renewed and because insurance companies share claim information , you will not get a competitive offer from any standard insurance company . You will end up paying much , much more money for the same coverage . My advice is to raise your deductible as high as you can tolerate and save your insurance for real disasters . Your question is important and I hope I 've answered it to your satisfaction . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Its no problem . I answer questions like this all the time . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Who Are The Major Health Insurance Companies ?
There 's many many insurance companies out there in the marketplace . United Health Group -LRB- includes United Healthcare -RRB- is the biggest health insurance company in the United States and offer plans in every state . Wellpoint -LRB- includes Anthem -RRB- Kaiser , Aetna , Cigna , Coventry , and CareFirst are some of the other big name insurance companies in the country . However , not every company offers health plans in every state .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
The general answer to your question is `` Yes . '' Though the renewal policy varies from insurance carrier to insurance carrier and may also be impacted by insurance department requirements in your state . Most short term medical policies can be renewed at least once and with some carriers and in some states perhaps up to three times . As a consequence of rising health insurance rates for ObamaCare compliant individual major medical policies for persons who qualify for little or no premium subsidies in the government health insurance marketplaces the interest in Short Term Major Medical plans has increased significantly . Insurance carriers have been modifying their Short Term Medical policies to take advantage of this opportunity and so there are many more options being made available and being offered for longer terms -LRB- some up to 11 months -RRB- than has historically been the case in this product segment . Short Term Major Medical insurance can be an affordable option for individuals who can pass relatively simple underwriting screening and who have no pre-existing condition concerns . A person considering this option should seek the services of an insurance broker who represents multiple carriers and who can help you find the policy best suited to your needs . You should also be aware that a Short Term Major Medical Plan does not qualify as minimum essential coverage under the terms of the Affordable Care Act and that you will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 95 or 1 % of your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- on your 2014 taxes . However , this penalty can only be recovered from a tax refund and the premium savings may far outweigh any potential tax penalty some individuals might be faced with .
NO ! NO ! NO ! Am I clear here ? If someone looked you in the eye and sold you this company 's coverage as true major medical insurance then you have been scammed . If you went to a web site and went `` Oh , cheap health insurance '' and then purchased it without reading the details you were still kind of scammed but you are also at some fault for not doing your homework . This is what is referred to as a limited benefit health plan . It probably does technically have some insurance components to it that are what are called `` indemnity plans '' which pay a fixed amount for a day in the hospital or for a visit to the doctor or towards other health services . These plans do not meet the legal requirements under ObamaCare to be defined as major medical insurance and to avoid the individual mandate tax penalty . In fact , they did n't meet the legal criteria to be called major medical plans before ObamaCare went into effect . Such plans were often marketed to businesses with lots of low income employees as a `` better than nothing '' alternative to more expensive group major medical plans . Sometimes they are also marketed to vulnerable individuals who do n't understand health insurance and that sounds like the case here . If your son is on a very tight budget then he will either qualify for very substantial premium subsidies in the government health insurance marketplace or for Medicaid . In either case he would have better , more affordable coverage through these options than what this outfit is selling . Also , please do my profession a favor and if an insurance agent has tried to sell you this coverage and told you it was major medical coverage please report him or her to your state 's insurance department for investigation .
Well , what is the best major to have to be an insurance agent ? First let me qualify this by saying you do n't have to have a college degree to be an agent , nor is there really a major to become an insurance `` agent '' . You can do several business type majors that would work perfectly for working on the company side of insurance . Finance , computer science , math , accounting and so on would work for the company side . For the agent side ? A bit different . I guess I can tell you what my choices were from college . Originally a accounting/computer science major who in my 4th year decided to switch to marketing and industrial psych . The business background helped because when you are an agent you are in business for yourself and really by yourself . So understanding overhead , management , advertising are all pluses . However , I have the most mileage from the industrial psych classes . Industrial psych is workplace psych where you study why people do what they do at work . That education has helped me greatly as insurance sales as an agent really is about forming relationships and trust if you want a long term business relationship . Just remember no matter what you do , if you go into this business there will be people that love you and people that do n't . Try and focus on those who love you and let somebody else have those that do n't . Honestly there is enough to go around .
Everyone above makes good points . So my copy & paste reply is NOT to point out errors ... only to expand on their points ... A different view point . My opinion ... EVERYONE should have SOME Critical Illness Insurance -LRB- CI -RRB- unless you are just super-crazy wealthy & can write a check for just about `` anything you want '' . -LRB- yet even then the price of the insurance may be low enough that you would n't `` want to use your own money when you can leverage the funds from an insurance carrier ... that 's another post one day ... -RRB- Bob - ... recommended for those who would have difficulty paying their out of pocket expenses in the event of a severe health impairment . A good major medical policy will cover most of your health care bills ... . I WOULD LIKE TO SAY that even in 2013 when he posted , major medical has SO MANY holes in it , the ideas that just having major med is enough ... I find that crazy . WHY Gravy ??? 1 . lost time from work 2 . limitations on therapies 3 . `` 4th quarter penalty '' ... meet your deductible in December & it starts over again Jan. 1st . 4 . travel 5 . uncovered expenses like durable medical equipment . 6 . paying someone to clean , cook , & even wipe your butt -LRB- yes . I said that -RRB- . 7 . the time away from work for your spouse , loved one , family , or friend that is `` helping you recover '' . 8 . alternative treatments not covered by your major med 9 . In todays Obamacare world , where networks have RADICALLY changed , you might NEED to go out of your `` network '' to save your freaking life !! Who will write the check for that ?? 10 . I can go on & on ... . POINT : Major Med has WAY too many holes to think that `` all is good '' if you have a card in your wallet . CI Kelly - great points about hazardous occupation , the self-employed , or someone who was declined Disability Insurance . I WOULD ALSO say it is great for those that `` have no income '' , Like stay at home parents . ALSO , I do n't see it as an `` alternative '' to disability . It should be assessed for what it does on it 's own , or as a complement to disability . As a general rule , we always introduce both DI & CI when the conversation is about `` loss of income '' . Peggy - Just for a rainy day ?? I have clients that EARN A LOT OF MONEY ... Yet they still own CI . So from the $ 10 an hour bagboy at the grocery to those making 6 , or event 7 figures a year , CI can be a valuable tool . Folks , the WHY behind buying a CI protection plan is as unique as you are . Lost income - Works for that . Cover out of pocket costs that are n't covered by medical insurance - Works for that too . YOU SHOULD chat with an agent that represents several carriers . 1st , because they all have various underwriting appetites . 2nd , for the maximum # of conditions that `` trigger a benefit '' & other features a plan may have -LRB- like a full refund of premiums if you die for anything other than a named illness -RRB- . 3rd , and your last consideration when 1 & 2 are `` equal '' , look at the monthly premium you will pay ... Reach out if you have questions ... - gravy .
How do you define cheap ? In 2014 the average monthly cost for a Silver level ObamaCare compliant major medical plan was $ 328 . By that standard any coverage costing less than that would be `` cheap '' . People who qualify for little or no subsidy of their individual health insurance -LRB- shame on you for making more than $ 42,000 annually -RRB- may argue that $ 328 or more per month for health insurance is n't affordable much less cheap . But the folks in Washington , D.C. know better about these things than you do . Some people who are healthy and are low consumers of health care services have turned to Short Term Medical plans as a more affordable option for health insurance coverage . And , indeed this may work out well for some people as Short Term Medical policies are generally cheaper than individual major medical policies . However , before pursuing this strategy you do need to be aware that Short Term Medical plans do n't cover pre-existing conditions , usually do n't cover preventive care , may not cover prescription drugs and may have other limitations . Also , they do not meet the criteria under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual coverage mandate and therefore can leave you vulnerable to a tax penalty for noncompliance . You should seek out an experienced health insurance agent to discuss your needs and options and to fully understand whatever health insurance product it is that you purchase .
No and yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- anyone applying for major medical health insurance coverage after January 1 , 2014 can not be denied coverage for a pre-existing health condition . Insurance coverage is guaranteed to be issued and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately . However , this does require that you enroll for individual health insurance coverage during the mandated open enrollment period which for 2014 ended on March 31st . If you failed to enroll during the open enrollment period then you can not apply for major medical insurance coverage until the next open enrollment period which begins on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . The only exceptions to this part of the law are for what are referred to as `` Change of Life Status Events '' such as marriage , divorce , losing other health insurance coverage , or having or adopting a child -LRB- as the most common examples -RRB- . For the remainder of 2014 the only options available to persons who failed to enroll during the open enrollment period would be Short Term Medical insurance or perhaps a limited benefit/indemnity policy . However , these policies do still have some underwriting question associated with them that could result in your being declined for coverage . Also , these types of health plans do not cover pre-existing health conditions and do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for being major medical coverage . Therefore , you would be subject to the individual mandate tax penalty even if you do take out one of these types of policies .
Group health insurance is a health insurance policy or plan -LRB- depending upon how it is funded -RRB- that is provided by an employer for its employees or through an organization such as a labor union for its members . In a group health insurance policy situation the employer is the actual policy holder and its employees and covered dependents are subscribers who receive a certificate of coverage . In this context the employee 's health insurance is tied to their place of employment and while -LRB- depending upon the size of the group -RRB- there are state and federal laws that allow for an ex-employee to continue their coverage through the group plan for some defined period of time , eventually a former employee will lose access to their ex-employer 's group plan and have to replace it coverage from a new employer or individual health insurance . With the latest round of implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- effective January 1 , 2014 group health insurance is in many ways more complicated than ever before . For instance , employers in the 2 to 50 employee market segment in the vast majority of statesnow operate in a community rated situation and are finding that new benefit plan designs are being presented to them that may differ significantly from their current rate structures and plan designs . Fully insured ACA compliant health plans for the 2 to 50 market segment are now guaranteed to be issued , are not subject to underwriting and can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods -LRB- just to highlight some of the most major changes -RRB- . Larger sized groups , while they are certainly impacted by the effects of the ACA , are still operating under a mix of the old rules and the new ones . So , right now groups with 51 + employees are still subject to underwriting , though the new ACA rules will be migrating up the ladder to apply to groups in the 51 to 99 employee range in the future . There will be groups who will be winners and losers under the requirements of the ACA and depending upon the composition of the group and its average income levels for its workforce , some employers may find that providing group health insurance is no longer in the best financial interest of many of their employees when compared with the subsidized individual health insurance that many of their employees could qualify for . If you are an employer faced with these issues and are looking for experienced guidance on these matters please feel free to contact me for a consultation .
Women who are currently pregnant can not qualify for individual major medical coverage . Likewise , their spouse -LRB- or expectant father -RRB- can not qualify for individual major medical coverage . An exception is women who qualify for an employer group health insurance plan . Group health insurance plans are not allowed to consider pregnancy a pre-existing condition .
As of January 1 , 2014 all major medical insurance plans , both individual and group , can no longer have any exclusions , limitations or waiting periods for pre-existing health conditions . So , from that perspective it is not a matter of which health insurance accepts pre-existing conditions . Any health insurance plan in compliance with the Affordable Care Act has to . Now , there are Short Term Major Medical policies and some limited benefit and/or indemnity type policies out there that can still apply underwriting and can limit or exclude pre-existing conditions but these are not major medical health insurance plans that meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . In some instances people are marketing these types of products as a low cost alternative to ACA compliant health insurance plans . They provide you with some degree of financial protection but they will not shield you from the Individual Mandate tax penalty or provide you with comprehensive coverage . If you are offered a policy that does not cover pre-existing conditions that is a red flag that someone is trying to sell you a non-compliant policy - BUYER BEWARE .
YES , in the aggregate sense . Perhaps for some individuals or groups their particular situation will allow them to benefit from the changes in rating methods and benefits required by the Affordable Care Act . But for most individuals and groups I am entirely comfortable in predicting higher health insurance costs . First of all , the underlying cost of health care services continues to rise . As these costs rise the cost of insuring these services must rise accordingly , this has been the case throughout my 30 years in the health insurance industry . Secondly , we are beginning to get a picture of what the enrollment composition in the individual health insurance marketplaces is looking like . As predicted by many industry professionals , the enrollment is skewing towards an older and sicker population with the highly desired young and healthy population largely remaining on the sidelines . Just today one of nation 's largest pharmacy management companies reported their preliminary analysis of the prescription utilization of marketplace enrollees vs their pre-health care reform population . Usage of expensive prescription medications for serious chronic health problems is 47 % higher , and this is just based on a couple of months of utilization data ! While some hold out the hope that the people who waited until the last moment to enroll were disproportionately young and healthy , my own experience enrolling people gives little indication that this was the case . So , the table has been set for adverse selection -LRB- more sick than healthy enrollees -RRB- in the health insurance pool , especially for the insurance carriers who elected to participate in the government health insurance marketplaces . This can not help but translate into higher health insurance costs for 2015 and in many areas of the country this will translate into very significant double digit increases in individual and small group health insurance . This has already been broadly hinted at by all the major health insurance carriers , it 's really not a question of `` if '' but just `` how much '' .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
Why would you have two health policies ? Is one a supplemental to your base policy ? Generally a major medical policy will coordinate benefits if there is more than one policy in force on the same individual . I would consult your tax adviser as far as the ability to deduct both premiums but quite honestly you are spending a lot more than you need too if both are Major Medical . If you have a Major medical and a policy to supplement the major medical policy , designed to help pay your deductibles then my reaction would be yes you can . Verify this with your tax adviser however .
Long term major medical policies will not be issued anywhere other than your primary physical residence . If you need health insurance outside of your state you would need to purchase a short term major medical . Unfortunately , these plans do not cover wellness , pre-existing conditions and only last for up to 12 months . A better route to go would be a long term major medical with a national PPO network allowing you access to the benefits across the country . For more information on out-of-state major medical plans visit www.clminsure.com or call 561-320-2978
You would be best served to assume the answer to this question will be `` No '' , especially if you are over age 18 . Vision exams , eyeglasses and contact lenses are generally covered under a separate vision insurance plan if your employer offers one or you choose to purchase coverage in the individual market . There are certainly some self-funded employer health plans and union health plans that include vision coverage in the major medical package but these are relatively rare . An area of confusion and frustration for many businesses and individuals who are purchasing health insurance plans that meet the minimum essential benefits requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that it requires that PEDIATRIC dental and vision services be covered under the major medical plan . Of course , some people just hear the dental & vision part and think it applies to adults enrolled in the plan -LRB- it does n't -RRB- . The other big surprise can be how the pediatric dental & vision benefits are structured in the health plan . Preventive dental and an annual eye exam should be covered at 100 % . After that , the coverage can vary wildly from one insurance carrier to the next . Some design their pediatric dental & vision benefits like standard vision and dental insurance plans that people have been accustomed to . However , it is not uncommon to find that non-preventive pediatric dental and vision services are subject to the major medical plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , technically your child 's eyeglasses may be covered but if you have a $ 4000 deductible you have n't met then in practical terms this will mean your child 's eyeglasses will be an out-of-pocket expense .
The major health insurance options in Tennessee are Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Tennessee , AETNA , Assurant Health/John Alden , CIGNA , Humana , StarMark and United Healthcare . These are the major players in both the group and individual health insurance markets . For 2014 they were joined by the Tennessee Health Co-op which is an organization created under a grant from the Federal government to provide an additional option in the government health insurance marketplace . There are a couple of third party administered health insurance products whose policies may be underwritten by Nippon Life or some other insurance company but they represent a very small segment of the marketplace .
No . Major medical insurance is controlled at the state level . For this reason you must purchase major medical insurance from an insurance carrier approved in your state of residence . With the most recent stage of implementation of the Affordable Care Act on January 1 , 2014 this has often resulted in stark contrasts in the cost of individual and small group health insurance depending upon which side of the state line a person or business is domiciled . As an agent in Memphis , Tennessee I can assure you that there are lots of people in Arkansas and Mississippi who wish they could purchase individual health insurance in Tennessee . The cost differences -LRB- which always varied from state to state -RRB- are now substantially different and higher for the residents of Arkansas and Mississippi . That 's not to say health insurance costs are n't higher in Tennessee in 2014 but they did go up far less than in surrounding states . You may have been confused by some politicians talking about allowing the purchase of health insurance policies across state lines . However , this is not how the Affordable Care Act is currently structured . While this idea sounds great on the face of it , it is neither practical nor a real solution for the cost problems individuals and small businesses are being presented with . All health care is local and just as the cost of living and real estate prices are vastly different from New York City to Omaha , Nebraska , the same is true of health care and the health insurance plans tied to it in a given geographic area .
That is a great question ! It is possible , but I will not mislead you , it will be difficult . The majority of insurers will cap policy writing at 80-85 ; so you will need a good independent agent who can search multiple companies for you to find one that will write at his age . The second hurdle will be his health . It would be very difficult to find a company that will write if he is in a nursing home , receiving home health care , or has had any major health issues within the past couple of years . Many will decline if he 's wheelchairbound . Again , you will need a good agent that can seek out the company that will write for you . The last hurdle will be the cost . Even if you can find the company that will write his policy , it is very likely that it will be too costly to afford . I 'd hazard a guess that it would be in the hundreds of dollars a month price range , unless his health is excellent . Life insurance is one of those things where the earlier you buy it , the cheaper it is , and it hurts me to say that far too many people either through their fault or not , end up waiting far too late to buy it . Far too many wait until there has been a scare , and then it is too late , either due to health or financial concerns . You may be able to find a policy , look for an independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a specific brand name -RRB- and have them go through your options . It is my prayer for you that you can find one that fits . If you have further questions , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thank you for asking !
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover A Tubal Reversal ?
Reversal of voluntary sterilization such as tubal ligation or vasectomy is not a covered expense under most health insurance plans . Health insurance is designed for things that are deemed medically necessary and surgery to reverse a tubal ligation is performed for reasons other than to correct a medical condition . Your answer is no .
It is highly unlikely that your insurance carrier will cover the reversal of a tubal ligation . This is viewed as an elective procedure and elective procedures by definition are n't medically necessary . Perhaps it is an imperfect analogy but it would be viewed similarly to cosmetic surgery , perhaps desired by the policyholder but not required to maintain or improve the health of the policyholder . I have heard that there are relatively rare situations when a tubal ligation becomes the cause of health issues , in this scenario a doctor could make the case that medical necessity has become involved and then approval by the insurance carrier would become a much more distinct possibility . But , as I said , these are pretty rare events so I would n't place much hope in having a tubal ligation reversal covered by your health insurance .
Reversal of voluntary sterilization such as tubal ligation or vasectomy is not a covered expense under most health insurance plans . Health insurance is designed for things that are deemed medically necessary and surgery to reverse a tubal ligation is performed for reasons other than to correct a medical condition . Your answer is no .
As a general rule , no . A health insurance policy does not cover reversal of a vasectomy . Likewise for `` untying '' a female 's tubes -LRB- reversing tubal ligation -RRB- . Both are elective procedures . Only treatment deemed medically necessary is a covered expense item under a health insurance policy . This is true for individual plans as well as employer group plans .
Most health insurance programs will not cover the reversal of any voluntary sterilizations . You may have to pay for the procedure out of pocket . The expenses are tax deductible , which may reduce the total net expense . IVF is a frequent alternative to tubal reversal , and is sometimes covered by insurance . Eight states have mandates requiring certain plans to cover IVF expenses . Your other alternative is to purchase a plan with a higher actuarial value -LRB- platinum or gold plan -RRB- . That way more of your pregnancy-related health care will be covered . In addition , you should purchase short term disability to replace income during maternity leave . This needs to start prior to conception .
Most frequently health insurance will not cover reversals of elective sterilizations . Carriers tend to approve procedures that either result in a cure , or lower subsequent claims . In this case future claims are likely to be much higher once the ability to conceive is restored . Fifteen states have mandates requiring certain health insurance plans to cover specified infertility treatments . Every single mandate excludes tubal ligation and vasectomy reversal surgery from the requirement . Your best option is purchasing coverage optimized for the resulting pregnancy , and utilizing the un-reimbursed tax deductions to reduce expenses .
As long as it 's deemed medically necessary by the attending physician , then it should be . The bad news is that most times a tubal ligation is considered an elective procedure , so getting it or getting it reversed wo n't fall under covered services . An easy way to find out is to contact the benefits verification department of your insurance carrier -LRB- the phone number is usually on the insurance cards -RRB- and ask specifically if it is a covered service . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978 ... I would love to hear from you .
Voluntary sterilization is often covered under many group health insurance plans . Tubal ligation as well as vasectomy are common forms of permanent birth control . The vasectomy is a much simpler operation usually performed on an outpatient basis in a doctor 's office . Tubal ligation is more invasive , performed under general anesthesia in a hospital . Tubal ligation is often performed in conjunction with other `` female '' surgery such as a hysterectomy or D&C .
Tubal ligation is not covered by Medicare if the procedure is performed simply for sterilization , and the desire to have no more children . If the tubal ligation is done to cure another health condition , or to alleviate the symptoms of another general health condition , then it can be covered by Medicare Part A or B .
It will depend on the specifics of your health plan , but since a tubal ligation is not a medical necessity it likely would not be covered . Another issue concerns medical complications from the tubal ligation procedure . In most cases , complications would be a covered expense even though the original procedure was not .
Most insurance plans will not cover the reversal of a voluntary sterilization or any treatments designed to overcome infertility . There are fifteen states with insurance mandates requiring some form of coverage for infertility , but every one of these mandates specifically excludes covering reversal surgeries . The best alternative is to take advantage of the tax deductible expenses , and to buy extra coverage for any resulting pregnancy : lower deductible health insurance , short term disability , hospital indemnity .
Reverse Life Insurance is a life settlement in which the policy holder `` sells '' his policy for cash . In order to be considered for a reverse life insurance transaction , the insured person must show probability of a short life expectancy -LRB- very poor health or very advanced age -RRB- , and the policy must have indications that it would have value to the person -LRB- s -RRB- buying it -LRB- increasing cash value and/or enough years left that death is almost certain to occur before the policy ends -RRB- .
There are several steps that a retired person can take to increase their income . The first is to unretire . Retirement is overrated . Working has positive effects on a person and when the work is meaningful it can add years of enjoyment . It can certainly stretch your retirement budget . Even before you retire you can discuss this with your employer to determine if there is some way you can return to the workforce as either a consultant or contract worker . It would be best to determine which aspects of your work you enjoy and what type of projects you want to do . Enter into an agreement to work on those things that interest you . I know a teacher who shows up two periods of day to teach Physics and then gets in his car and drives home . He enjoys what he does and doesnt want to participate in the wider campus life . Sometimes it isnt possible to continue to work for your current employer . In those instances make an inventory of work in which you excel . Armed with that list contact people who need full or part-time help in your area of expertise and offer your services , or contract for your services . If you can not find an employer who needs your talents consider working for yourself . There are a variety of ways to advertise your skills and there are people looking for your talents . If you want to try something altogether new there are franchise opportunities available . These opportunities run the gamut from stores to on-line services and sales . Finding a program that suits your capabilities and temperament should be relatively easy . Some of these opportunities can become quite lucrative . I have clients who are leaving their employment long before retirement because their on-line sales business is flourishing . Obviously working provides income and it also reduces the number of years that you will depend upon your retirement savings to provide income . If you are drawing retirement income this will give you money which you can put into a Roth IRA to fund the period when you finally do stop working altogether . One of the most important things that working does is to allow you to delay receiving social security . For a long list of reasons it is usually to a retirees advantage to delay the start of benefits until they reach age 70 . The increase in benefits is substantial to the worker and to the widow it is amazing . Working provides a great deal of emotional satisfaction and a sense of freedom . Another technique to increase your retirement income is to tap into the equity of your home . Regardless of whether the mortgage is paid or not , you can take out a reverse mortgage after age 62 . A reverse mortgage will allow you to tap the equity in your home . This is a complex transaction and the only transaction that I can think of where an applicant must be counselled by a disinterested party . It is the right move for some , though and could make your retirement more comfortable . Another way to stretch your retirement dollars is to determine what you own of value that you no longer need . If what you own can be converted to cash it might help stretch your retirement income assets . Selling things on the internet is relatively inexpensive and can be quite fruitful . I advertised an accordion on the internet and was besieged with interested buyers . Estate sales demonstrate that there are things that are not being used by the retirees that are of interest to the public . Often cars are no longer being used , undeveloped land lies idle and jewelry lies unused in a safe deposit box . Another way to stretch your retirement income is to determine what services are available to seniors in your location that cost you money currently . Many places offer discounts and sometimes services can be free . Even utilities companies participate in programs to lower costs for seniors . With almost 50 % of retirees depending on Social Security for their retirement income it is very important to understand how you can stretch that income and even increase it .
That is a great question ! With the over fifty attempted repeal tries , and the very public stances against it that the Republican party has , you are certainly right to wonder . But for all of the bluster and rhetoric , here 's what the reality is - the American public does like the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , as the uninsured rate is the lowest it 's been in decades . The Supreme Court decisions gives the Law solid legal footing . With an election looming , and still stinging from what most in the Republican party thought was going to be a slam-dunk win 4 years ago on a platform of repealing the Act , I think that the wiser leaders of the party know they need to rethink that strategy . As much as they dislike it , the voting electorate does like it , and sadly , many rely on the subsidies to be able to afford their coverage . The adding of Medicaid has progressed slowly but surely , even in the Red States that had spoken out against it , as leaders realize that after the nearly 2 decades of economic pressure , the average American needs the assistance . Even as there seems to be a to tendency to disregard facts in politics , when it comes down to where the votes are coming from , there can be softening or complete reversals of what had been very public stands on issues like health care.With the polling numbers falling solidly in favor of the Act , and the Law being upheld twice in the Supreme Court , I 'd suspect you will hear less talk of repealing the Act . That said , I 'm certain that each candidate will have an opinion on how he or she will change the Law to improve what does n't work as well as it could . There is intense pressure from the insurance companies to regain the incredible profits they were making , and other medical companies also would like to push their agenda 's , so the parts of the law that kept prices low I 'd expect to see attacked . So in short , repealed ? No . Changed ? Probably , depending upon the outcome of the election , and how the public responds to the proposed changes . A great question , and one we in the industry have been watching closely also . Thanks for asking !
Retirement should be about reducing stress . In order to do this we need to evaluate those things that could happen and develop strategies for dealing with them . At a minimum this will mean maintaining proper insurance coverage on your auto and home . It well might mean purchasing life insurance for the specific purpose of creating a legacy for those you love . If you do that you can spend your assets without any thought of conserving them for your heirs . The most pressing risk according to surveys is the risk of living too long . None of us wants to run out of money . The possibility of living a long time in retirement is quite high . Imbedded in this risk is the likelihood of a needing medical care and custodial care . Another risk is the result of the economy . It could go through major shifts and investments might have a period of decline that could jeopardize your retirement . At that point it is unlikely that you would be able to do anything about it as our ability to work diminishes with every passing year . Another risk that we face is that we could lose our spouse . This is inevitable but it could come sooner rather than later and that could have a profound impact on available money and support . Widows are often faced with very tough economic realities . Long term care requirements are the number one reason why a wealthier person would run out of assets in retirement . There are several strategies to address this risk including long term care insurance . There are several things a person can do to increase their income in retirement . One of the most significant things is to carefully select the date when social security and pension benefits start . The social security benefits increase the longer a worker waits up to the age of 70 . This increases the benefit to a widow as well , should the worker die first . People often own a home . The value of a home minus the mortgage is known as home equity . This home equity can be used to derive income . A reverse mortgage can be put in place that will allow a person to remain in their home and yet withdraw loans against the home for income in retirement . The need for tax planning certainly doesnt end at retirement . There are tax-saving decisions available that will expand income . Your assets are not all taxed in the same way and by converting assets to income in a tax wise manner can save a great deal and expand spendable income in retirement . In all strategies there are trade-offs . If you take a reverse mortgage on the home the amount you can leave your children declines . There will be years in which medical expenses will greatly reduce your taxable income . A Roth IRA provides income that isnt subject to tax which could be a benefit to keep your income in a lower income tax rate bracket . One of the things that I think is most important in developing strategies for retirement is to establish decision points . These are dates or times when you and your spouse or perhaps including your children decide on where you will live , who will provide care if necessary , what assets can be gifted and other important decisions . I am getting ready for one of those conferences even as I write this . It is important to make decisions before there is a crisis . A widow told me a few days ago that moving out of her home into a down-sized facility was one of the most difficult tasks she had ever performed . The emotional and physical toll was enormous . She had planned to make the move several years in the future and she is convinced that she would hot have been able to make the decision , let along , and make the move at that later date . Decide now when you will downsize . Decide now who will assist you or when you will begin to get outside help . There are so many decisions and it is always best to make them before it is absolutely necessary . These decisions can have a profound effect on insuring the financial success of your retirement .
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
If you write an appeal letter to your health insurance company , call the carrier or broker first to obtain a contact name and address . Be sure to include all pertinent facts about your claim denial and additional information that may cause an underwriter to consider changing their decision . It never cost anything to request a reversal .
Life insurance is cheaper for women because statistics over time have proven women as a group tend to live longer than males as a group . Pricing is lower because `` risk '' is spread out over a longer period of time . In a reverse , women cost more for health insurance -LRB- where it 's allowed -RRB- because they are bigger users of healthcare than men . Maybe the reason women live longer .
Can a spouse cancel health insurance prior to a divorce ? Well they can try . A smart HR person takes all requests in writing and in a case where a spouse is being dropped , a second signature is often required as the employer seeks to be held harmless when something like this occurs . So it is possible , but it can also be reversed by the court if the court feels it is necessary .
Reverse Life insurance refers to a viatical settlement . A person sells his life insurance police for cash , usually more than current cash value but less than the face amount . The insured loses all interest in the policy and when the insured dies the money goes to the viatical company .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does All State Renters Insurance Cover Flood ?
Flood insurance is handled through the Federal government only and sold through insurance carriers . Renters insurance as well as homeowners insurance does not cover flood damage of any kind . You must purchase flood insurance as a seperate policy . Contact a local agent to find out availabity for this coverage within your area .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
State Farm renter 's insurance does not cover flood . In fact , no renter 's insurance policy covers flood since it must be purchased separately . It is a specific risk that has been handled by a government agency in the past . If you are in a flood zone or are at risk for flood damage , you can speak to a broker about rates and policy information .
To have flood covered by any type of renters or homeowners coverage , you must have a special flood policy . Your homeowners and renters will cover water damage due to sewer backup , burst pipes , or rain damage from a leaking roof , it will not cover flood . There is a special Federal Flood Insurance program you can look in to if you live in a flood zone .
Flood damage is excluded on just about every home , condo and renters policy . In order to have coverage for flood damage you need flood insurance which is a separate policy . The cost for flood insurance depends on your area and flood zone . FEMA regulates flood insurance so rates are the same with all companies who service flood insurance .
Standard renters ' insurance does not cover damage to property from flooding . A separate flood policy is available through most insurance agencies , as part of the Federal flood program . Usually , the coverage that is most important to the renter is for contents that could possibly be damaged as a result of flooding .
Renters insurance -LRB- and Homeowners Insurance -RRB- does not cover flood . It will cover water damage due to sewer backup if the appropriate endorsement is in place . It may also cover water damage due to pipe breakage depending on the cause of the break . If you live in a flood zone you need to look into your State Flood Insurance program .
Renters may move with you if all other underwriting guidelines remain the same . I am assuming that you are moving withing the state and not across state lines . I am assuming that you are not moving to flood zone within the state that require flood insurance . You are also not moving from an apartment to a mobile or trailer home . All things being equal your your renters insurance moves with you .
Your renters coverage will cover your possessions if the water damage is from a covered peril such as a broken pipe , but will not cover you from damage due to a flood from rising waters . In order to be covered for damage from a flood , you will need to purchase a renters flood policy .
Flood insurance or coverage for a flood is not included in a homeowners insurance policy and is in fact specifically excluded . There is only one option for flood protection and that is to purchase a flood policy . Almost all insurance companies can write you a flood policy but the policy is underwritten though FEMA . Which ever insurance company you currently work with on your homeowners insurance should be able to set you up with a flood policy . Unless there is a close of escrow you have a 30 day wait before a flood policy can become active so no waiting until the storm hits to purchase a flood policy . Flood is not to be mixed up with water damage which is covered under a homeowners policy . An example of water damage would be a pipe that burst in the home .
Renters insurance will not cover flood damage . Neither will homeowners insurance . Flood insurance is a completely separate policy that is regulated by the federal government . Flood policies can be a little pricey . Depending on you geographic location if you are a homeowner you may be required by your lending institution to carry flood insurance . Renters on the other hand would not be required to carry such coverage unless specified by the rental agreement .
I used to be an Allstate agent , but it does n't matter where you purchase your Renter 's policy . Flood is exluded on the policy . Butif you have water damage from a pipe breaking or the toilet over flowing , those type of water damages would be covered.If you areworried about flood , you can buy flood insurance even if you dont ' liive in a flood zone and even if you rent .
Renters Insurance may cover water damage ; however , Flood Damage generally would not be covered . Flood is typically defined by rising waterfrom the exterior of the dwelling . It is important to check your specificRenters Insurance Policy and verify both the Definitions Section as well as the Exclusions Section of the policy . If you need further assistance , you may contact your insurance carrier for detailed assistance . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance will not cover flood damage . Some renters policies may offer sump pump and sewer back up coverage at an additional cost . Flood insurance is sold separately and requires an agent be licensed to sell it . If you feel you need flood insurance coverage I would suggest contacting your local agent and discussing it with them .
Generally speaking NO ... virtually all carriers who use any part of an ISO homeowners insurance contract will exclude flood . Flood insurance is underwritten and priced by the government through FEMA . There are several carriers who write flood insurance and there should n't be any real variance to the pricing between the carriers . Even if you do n't think your home or business would ever flood , check out the cost of flood insurance . You might be surprised how cheap it actually is ... I know what I 'm talking about on this topic . My office had 7 feet of water in it after back to back 100 years storms hit my area back in 2010 . I did n't have flood insurance -LRB- dumb agent I know -RRB- and had to come out of pocket to rebuild my unit . I have flood insurance now ... costs me about $ 350 a year !!
Flood insurance is handled through the Federal government only and sold through insurance carriers . Renters insurance as well as homeowners insurance does not cover flood damage of any kind . You must purchase flood insurance as a seperate policy . Contact a local agent to find out availabity for this coverage within your area .
The property coverage you are afforded under renter 's coverage is for your personal property -LRB- furniture , tv , audio systems , clothes , dishes , etc -RRB- , but typically not for the building . If you are asking if your own personal property would be covered if a hurricane caused the damaged , then , yes , your personal property would be covered . However , there is one caveat ... if it was wind that was determined as the cause of loss . Hurricanes can cause damage not only by wind , but by flooding . If flooding -LRB- waters rising from outside -RRB- was the cause of loss , you may not be covered , because flood is typically excluded . You could possibly purchase flood coverage in this case .
Insurance covers specified perils . Water damage is the result of an event . Everything depends upon what caused the water damage . If the damage is caused by the sudden rupture of water pipes inside the home , the damage is covered by most homeowners policies . If the damage is caused by the overflow of a toilet , the loss would be excluded by most homeowners policies . Incidentally , many insurance companies will provide coverage for the overflowing of a toilet if an extension to coverage is purchased at an increased premium . If the loss is caused by water enter the house from outside it is most likely not going to be covered . Flood insurance , an additional insurance policy is required to cover this type of loss . While it is true that flood damage is not always clear cut , it is important to note that almost one quarter of all property claims involve flood damage in the United States . The purchase of a flood policy is a wise move regardless of where you are located . I have seen desert towns inundated as well as mountain communities . In some places flooding is common .
The short answer is no . Flood is a common exclusion in property coverage of all kinds , whether renters , condo unit owners of Homeowners . It is also excluded from commercial property forms . The only way to have coverage from flooding is to purchase a Flood Insurance Policy . This is a federal program managed by FEMA . The amoount you may pay for such coverage is based upon the location of your property as to what particular flood zone it may be situated .
Niether homeowners or renters insurnace will cover flood damage under normal circumstances . To get flood insurance coverage it must be purchased from a carrier that is appointed bye the federal government . Only select carriers provide flood insurance coverage and agents must be appointed with one of those carriers to be able to sell flood insurance coverage .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Homeowners Insurance Part Of Your Mortgage Payment ?
That is a great question ! The answer is it can be , but is n't normally . I have seen where the mortgage payment was inclusive of the homeowners policy premium , as a result of the lender having to reinsure the home when the owner allowed the previous policy to lapse . It is n't the usual case , but it can happen . Thanks for asking !
Not necessarily unless your Mortgage Company requires you to have it that way . In that case , an escrow account is set up and the future renewal payments will be drawn from that account when your insurance company bills your mortgage company . You make the monthly installments to the bank and then they in turn pay your renewals . Many banks also handle property taxes this way as well .
No it is not . You can however have it escrowed . You may prepay the premium each month factored into your mortgage payment and the mortgage company will pay the premium at each renewal on your behalf . Do n't be confused with mortgage insurance if you have a FHA loan . This insurance protects the lender in case you default on the mortgage .
Not unless your lender requires it or allows it . Contact your lender and inquire about an escrow account . You may already have an escrow account for taxes . If so , see if the property insurance can be added . Most likely you will have to add the property insurance at the renewal date of the policy after you pay the annual premium in full . Then your lender adds ther escrow additional to your billing every month until next policy renewal when they have collected 1/12 of the estimated premium from you each month and can pay your policy for you . Make sure you get copies of all documents relating to this action and your homeowners carrier changes your billing method to ` escrow bill ' , they have the correct address of the escrow disbursement entity , and the correct account number of your loan to reference their bill to the escrow disbursement entity . Follow up to make sure your carrier bills your escrow company and the bill is paid . Do not wait for a notice of cancellation for non-payment of your policy to be issued . Be pro-active with all of your insurance policies and always get it in writing - especially anything you sign . If someone tells you over the telephone `` OK , we will take care of that for you ... '' , tell them to send you a confirmation -LRB- or binder -RRB- in writing with a signature .
The Mortgage itself is a Loan Account setting up a method of repayment ; the repayment structure includes interest over the term of the loan . Monthly payments on a mortgage loan account are sometimes referred to as : P&I -LRB- Principal and Interest -RRB- . At the request of the customer and in some cases , as a requirement to the mortgage contract , an Impound Account -LRB- Escrow Account -RRB- will be initiated in order to accommodate the bi-annual payment of property taxes as well as an annual payment of home insurance . This account will pay a nominal interest rate credited to the account at the end of each year . If the customer has an Impound Account , the monthly mortgage payments will include a monthly savings amount which will be deposited directly into the impound -LRB- escrow -RRB- account in order to accumulate funds to pay future tax and insurance invoices . Regarding Homeowners Insurance , the policy must be purchased by the homeowner and the mortgage company must be listed as the Mortgage Loss Payee ; copies of all documents will be mailed to the mortgage company including invoices . If a homeowner does not purchase home insurance , the mortgage contract allows the mortgage company to place ` Forced Insurance ' on the property and charge the surcharged premium to the mortgage account ; this is not in the interest of the homeowner and should be avoided in the interest of premium amount and coverage afforded . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Homeowners insurance is mandatory because the house is thecollateral on the debt that you owe the lender . If you did n't pay your mortgage then the bank has the right to foreclose on your property and sell it to recoup the money that they lent you . The lender protects their collateral by being listed on your homeowner policy as `` Loss Payee '' . -LRB- The one paid when a loss happens -RRB- . If their collateral -LRB- your home -RRB- burns up in a fire , and then someone stops paying their mortgage , they would have no asset and no mortgage payments coming in . Item of note : If you decide that you do n't want to have homeowners coverage on the home , the lender can add insurance -LRB- that only protects their interest in the home -RRB- and make you , the homeowner/mortgagee , pay for it on top of their mortgage payment . It is one of the many clauses that you initialed when you signed your mortgage agreement .
Mortgage Life to protect your love ones from the burden of a mortgage can be accomplished in a couple of ways . You can purchase a policy from your bank or mortgage company that will pay off your obligation to them in the event of your death . The amount of the policy will be paid to the bank and your family and loved ones will not have that mortgage as a burden . The other option is to purchase a Term Life Policy through an independent agent that compares the best companies for this type of protection . The main benefits of a Term Life Policy is that the death benefit will not decrease during the life or term of the policy . The other benefit is that the death benefit is paid to your beneficiary and they decide where the money is distributed . Your family and/or loved on can pay off the house and use additional funds for final expenses or other considerations . You should compare both options . The term life policy is more flexible but both should be considered . Mortgage disability insurance can be purchased as separate policy through your bank or some insurance companies . Disability income is paid at a maximum per month depending on your state . They will compare what you receive from other sources , such as your employer or personal policy , and determine the maximum amount of payment that your can receive . You can add disability income additions or riders to your term life policy for the amount of your monthly mortgage payment and get the convenience of one payment . The cost of these policies and riders are dependent on the amount of monthly payment needed , the length of time the payments continue , your occupation , and the amount of time between when the disability starts and when the payments start . Check with your agent to determine how the program works for you .
The term ` Escrow ' has a double meaning . Escrow is utilized mainly in the Western States as the legal process of closing the purchase or refinancing transaction of real property ; Escrow Companies exist to facilitate the purchase , sale & refinancing of real property transactions . In States where Escrow Companies are not used , Mortgage and Title Companies utilize ` Closing Professionals ' to facilitate the same process . During the Escrow/Closing process , if a mortgage is involved , it is customary for the mortgage lender to require that all taxes are current and property insurance is paid in full for the first year . Escrow companies will be charged with the fiduciary responsibility to assure the mortgage company upon funding that both conditions have been met and proven . The term Escrow is also used synonymously with a Mortgage Impound Account which is simply a savings account setup for the purpose of saving funds in preparation of making payments to renew property insurance and property taxes ; a mortgage company or bank will simply calculate the necessary amount to be deposited into the Escrow/Impound account monthly in order for a shortage not to exist when future property tax and future property insurance invoices are presented . The monthly calculation usually involves the addition of the annual property tax and the annual property insurance , a 10 % safety buffer is added , then the total is divided by 12 . The account is an interest bearing account and an annual assessment summary is sent to the mortgage holder at the end of each year . There is usually no charge associated with having this account ; it is simply to facilitate payments without the burden of a large obligation at one time for the mortgage holder . It is important for homeowners to understand the escrow and/or impound process as there seems to be many misconceptions of how the process works . It is a very simple process but the most confusing to the ley person is the fact that he/she is actually depositing a monthly savings amount into an account which will pay future invoices presented . Property Taxes are generally invoiced twice a year and Homeowners Insurance is generally invoiced once a year ; money is saved on a monthly basis in order for the funds to be present when the invoices arrive . For a further and/or more detailed explanation , you may wish to contact your Real Estate , Mortgage and or Escrow/Closing Professional directly .
Disability mortgage insurance is traditionally a payment provision to a mortgage loan that pays the monthly payment when due if the borrower who opts to have the coverage is sick or hurt and unable to work under the provisions of the coverage . Alternatively , some people can purchase specific products that cover mortgage payments , or at least make the amount of the mortgage payment available as a disability income benefit , if the insured become sick or hurt and is unable to hurt . This coverage is bought to ensure that mortgage payments are paid when the borrower can not work to earn money to pay the mortgage .
No , homeowners and mortgage insurance are two different policies and they cover different events . Homeowners : this covers specified events that cause damage to your home , personal property and surrounding structures . Mortgage Insurance : this covers a default on the payment of a mortgage . What this means , is if you have a mortgage and you fail to pay it , then the mortgagee -LRB- e.g. bank -RRB- will file a claim against the policy to collect on the payment . I hope this helps .
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
Of course ! Several billing options exist for all lines of insurance , including homeowners . With homeowners you also have the option to escrow your payments with your bank -LRB- assuming you have a home loan -RRB- . Your monthly mortgage payment would include the payment for your insurance . Typically the best option to lower your premium is electronic funds transfer from your checking account . Your insurance payment is automatically processed on a certain day each month . Most companies provide a discount for automatic , electronic payments .
Some banks these days require that your Homeowners Insurance be paid by them froman escrow account . If that is the case , then when you are closing on your home and obtaining insurance , they will require you to pay your insurance professional an amount equal to the full first year 's premium . The policy will then be set up to bill your mortgage company upon each renewal . The monthly payments that you make to your mortgage company , in addition to principal and interest , will include an amount for the next renewal on your Homeowners Insurance . Your insurance company will bill your mortgage company at the renewal and the annual premium will then be paid by your mortgage company from your escrow account .
This question addresses the issue of policy names . A home policy could mean a homeowners insurance policy . A mortgage policy could be talking about the policy that protects a lender from default on a loan . The mortgage policy could also be talking about a term insurance policy that provides enough money to pay off the mortgage in the event of death during the term of the policy -LRB- and hopefully the mortgage . -RRB- Another problem is that there is a variety of property insurance policies , any one of which might satisfy a lender . Knowing the list of covered perils is critical and understanding the value added in a homeowners form is essential . The bottom line is that the home policy is probably designed to satisfy a lender and restore a damaged home for the benefit of the homeowner . The mortgage policy is generally designed to either insure enough money to pay off the mortgage or protect the lender against default by the borrower .
Generally Bank owned life insurance is designed to protect the bank if you take out a loan . I usually recommend buying your own policy . It gives your beneficiary more options . For example , mortgage insurance is usually offered by a bank . It can also be purchased on your own . Both would pay off the mortgage if you die . With the bank owned policy , that is the only choice . What if your spouse does n't want or need to pay off the mortgage however . This is not always the best option . If you own the policy , your wife or beneficiary may choose to invest the life insurance funds and use the interest to help make mortgage payments . Or the money would be more advantageous elsewhere . Mortgage life insurance with the bank is tied to that mortgage . What if you move ? Owning your own policy is portable , you can take it with you to your new home . I usually recommend level term to cover a mortgage . That way you have extra protection as your mortgage decreases because the death benefit will stay level . With a banks mortgage life insurance it just pays off the mortgage to the bank on that loan . Yes it works , but you are better off with your own policy .
There are two types of insurance that are known as mortgage insurance . When mortgage companies offer something other than a conventional loan they will often require the borrower to buy mortgage insurance which protects the mortgage company from default . There is also a form of life insurance which is designed to provide a death benefit that equals the balance due on a mortgage . Neither of these are the same as a homeowners policy . The homeowners policy protects the residence and contents against named perils . The homeowners policy also provides protection from personal injury and property damage lawsuits .
As long as you work with a broker who understands the process , it 's very easy to switch homeowners insurance . Remember that your mortgage company will need to be advised of this change . Also remember that your homeowners insurance may be part of your mortgage payment , so it 's important to make sure the escrow is straightened out properly . It 's also very important that you not cancel your old homeowners insurance until you have evidence of the new policy starting .
An escrow account is usually setup for you when you buy a new home , and this account is used to pay your property taxes and your homeowners insurance . Your monthly payment will include our principal and interest payment to the mortgage lender , as well as 1/12 of your yearly property taxes and homeowners insurance . When payment is due , your lender will make the payment on your behalf from the escrow account .
You can own a home without having homeowners insurance but more than likely you will need to maintain the coverage as a requirement of your mortgage contract . Most mortgage companies require `` Hazard Insurance '' to protect their investment in your home . If you fail to maintain `` Hazard Insurance '' , or commonly known as homeowners insurance , the mortgage company will put `` forced insurance '' on your home . The forced insurance policy will be much more expensive and will have inferior coverage . Some are even considered a `` single interest '' policy . This means that the mortgage company is the only beneficiary under the policy -LRB- you get nothing -RRB- . We do not recommend owning a home without homeowners insurance . For many people their home is their largest asset and you should protect it .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Much Is NYS Disability Insurance ?
The charge that can be made to employees receiving Disability Insurance under the New York Disability Benefits Law , to help offset the rate the employers pay , is 1/2 of 1 % or 60 cents per week , whichever is lower . The maximum of 60 cents per week applies even if the employee is working two or more jobs .
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
Some insurance carriers may use a credit score for rating purposes . Most of the insurance carriers in my state -LRB- New York -RRB- use a ` credit profile ' which means they access one of the big three credit bureaus and select specific items . What they select , how they interpret the data , and how it affects your premiums is not available for your scrutiny . In NY , credit profile is mostly used for new business quoting purposes for home and auto insurance . Carriers in NY load in a whole bunch of rating info when determining your premium - gender , age , marital status , own or rent your home , driving extract , # of years licensed , prior claims on home and/or auto policies , is your prior carrier preferred , standard , or substandard , distance driven to work , pleasuire or business use , and a lot more . Keep your ` credit profile ' and score as clean as possible . Most banks and credit unions have credit specialists who can advise you for free on how to do this . For example , pay all bills ahead of time if possible and always pay more than the minimum amounts . Do n't have credit lines totaling more than a certain % of your gross annual income , etc. . Credit profile is a major influence when getting insurance quotes . I know of no ` proof ' credit profile is a determinate of loss potential , but using credit profile for insurance rating is the way of the world .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
I would recommend contacting your local independent agent and giving him your address . Imagine if you were to turn your apartment upside down and `` shake out '' all of your `` stuff '' . How much would it cost to replace those items ? You will need to give the agent a dollar amount . This will determine how much you will pay for insurance . Renters insurance is relatively inexpensive and it provides valuable protection . Remember expensive items likely jewelry , furs , firearms , money & securities are excluded from personal property . You can schedule those items if you have an appraisal . In NY if you have $ 25,000 of personal property with $ 500,000 of liability the premium will run about $ 225 - $ 255 per year . Hope this helps !
Yes . Each state has it 's own department of insurance and sets it 's own requirements or compliances for all policies sold inside their particular state . Some states may look almost identical to other states requirement wise . Others like New York for example have very NY state specific rules that often require insurance companies setting up companies inside NY state . You might find ABC Insurance Carrier doing business in 49 states an ABC Insurance of New York doing business there . The state that I work in also is considered a pretty restrictive state for insurance companies . Restrictive is n't necessarily a bad thing . The idea is done with consumer protection in mind . For my state , it means new plan approval is much slower than other states , but the flip side of that is if a problem with a plan occurs , it usually has n't hit the `` streets '' in my state yet , so the consumers avoided a problem that way .
NYS Disability Insurance is a short term disability insurance policy offered by the state of New York to New York residents . It will pay a temporary cash benefit to eligible New Yorker 's if they are disabled due to an illness or injury suffered while not on the job . It also covered disabilities arising from pregnancies .
This question was asked before implementation of the Affordable Care Act , but the answer highlights important features of the new law : coverage for preexisting conditions , and the mandate to purchase . Health insurance in NY was expensive because laws required insurers to issue policies regardless of health . Healthy people were not required to purchase a policy . Eventually only the sickest people enrolled in the plans , forcing premiums very high . The Affordable Care Act includes a mandate for health people to purchase coverage . It remains to be seen if the penalty for being uninsured is stiff enough to avoid what happened in NY .
Without specifics , `` it depends ... '' on what state the policy is written in . I am in New York and the NY Personal Auto Policy is required -LRB- by statute -RRB- to have some type of `` Rental Vehicle Coverage Endorsement ' . It is not optional . The endorsement sets forth an Insuring Agreement , Definitions , Priority of Payment , Exclusions , Subrogation , Duties after an Accident or Loss , and General Provisions . Coverage for the actual damage to or loss ofthe rental vehicle -LRB- with limitations -RRB- is provided ` regardless of fault . ' The endorsement does not set forth value or limit . Theoretically , I can rent a Rolls Royce , total it , and my carrier most likely pays the rental company the $ 350,000 value of the car including loss of use . My NY Rental Vehicle Coverage does not pay the ` reduction/diminution in value of the vehicle ' in the event it is repairable - thiscoveragecannot be added to my policy . Diminution of Value coverage is available through the physical damage insurance offered by the rental company -LRB- aka the collision damage waiver , etc -RRB- . A thorough reading of an Erie Personal Auto Insurance policy issued in your state is warranted as my answer only applies to theNew York Personal Auto Policy . Commercial or Business auto policies address rental vehicles in a different manner - a topic for a separate question .
Gerber Life is a `` legitimate '' life insurance company in that it is domiciled in the state of NY and is located at 1311 Mamaroneck Ave. , White Plains , NY , 10605 , 914272-4000 , and is licensed to do business in all 50 states and Canada . They list six product groups on their website , WEBSITELINK , includingthe onlyendowment life policy that is also an adult life insurance policy . It 's called the Gerber Life College Plan and has been their flagship policy for a long time . They are definitely a niche carrier , targeting the parent and grandparent market . Their contracts have many guaranteed features that appeal to those that do n't want to take any chances that their insurance might lapse or diminish in value over time . I have worked with their service teams on a few occasions and they are knowledgeable and very customer-oriented . The have been rated `` A '' , AM Best 's third-highest financial rating , and `` A - '' by Weiss , which is their 3rd best rating as well . Both of those ratings are within the `` Excellent '' range of both rating services . That gives them a Comdex of `` 80 '' , which means that 80 % of all financially-rated carriers are ranked below them . If by `` legitimate '' you are referring to their contracts being of real value , or if can you trust a life insurance company that is also a baby food company , you may want to do more research . From and industry point of view , they are legitimate .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
Good Question . It will depend on many factors including ; Year Built , Construction Type , Square Feet of Living Area , Roof Type , Updates to Plumbing , Heating , Electrical , & Roof , Pets , Pool & Credit history of the buyer . You cover the home for what it will cost to rebuild . The mortgage company will require this as well . On the appraisal it will list how much the appraiser feels it would cost . This is usually based on the GLA , or gross living area , of the home and the quality of construction . Also the area you live in will impact the rate as well . If you live in Florida you are more prone to hurricanes . If you live in California you are more prone to earthquakes . My suggestion would be to contact your local independent agent to get the best rate . As a very very rough idea it costs about $ 450 per $ 100,000 of building coverage on Long Island , NY . Hope this answer helps .
`` National Benefit Life Insurance Company '' used to be `` Beneficial National Life Insurance Company '' . They underwrite State Disability Insurance , Student Life Insurance , and term life insurance sold by Primerica Agents in New York State . Their home office is in Long Island City , NY and they are rated A + by AM Best .
Probably because the actuaries in Underwriting have calculated the risk of something happening to property in NY to be higher than in Wyoming . With millions of people , there is much more likelihood of a burglary or other perils befalling a tenant . I do n't know for sure if you are talking about in Manhattan , but if you are another possible reason is that the premium is calculated in part by the value of the Personal Property . People living on 5th Avenue tend to have more - and more expensive things than the Average Joe !
Full coverage is base a lot of different factors . Year , Make , Model your personal info as to where you live -LRB- zip code -RRB- , age how long you been licensed , tickets or accidents within the last 40 months , any other additional house hold members with licenses or permits . The biggest one specially in NY is credit . I would advice you to go to your local DMV ask for your drivng record and bring it to a couple of different agent and make sure you have a Vin number for the vehicle your looking to insure . If your looking at different vehicle 's remember all vehicles have different symbols . The price for full coverage on a 2014 Camaro is not the same for 2014 Honda Accord . Thank you and good luck .
Gerber life insurance is life insurance provided by Gerber Life Insurance Company . A company headquartered in White Plains , NY and established in 1967 . It is a financially separate entity from the Gerber Products Company , with the same mission - `` help parents raise happy , healthy children '' . Gerber life insurance offers both term life insurance and whole life insurance . They even have signature products that include term or whole life . The Gerber Life Insurance Company currently has a single A rating from A.M. Best , which is consider ` Excellent ' . A.M. Best provides impartial reporting by rating insurance company management , integrity , and financial stability .
USAA 's website states that their long term care insurance is underwritten by John Hancock Life Insurance Company -LRB- USA -RRB- . USAA Life General Agency -LRB- known in CA and NY as USAA Life and Health Insurance Agency -RRB- acts as an agent to provide long term care insurance to its members . Plans are not available in all states .
Good Question ! In NY , and on Long Island , most insurance companies will not increase your premium because you have a pool on the premises . Some insurance companies will not insure the home if you have a slide , diving board or if the pool is not surrounded by a gate with a locking mechanism . The short answer is no having a pool that is up to code will not increase your insurance premium . Hope this answer helps !
Mercury does offer renters insurance in NY state . Currently they are limiting the number of newly written renters policies . Mercury also writes auto insurance . You may want to consider a package with them as they give a hefty discount on auto insurance for a renters policy . It can upwards of 5 % - potentially making your renters policy free .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Does A Home Insurance Policy Cover ?
A homeowner 's insurance policy actually covers many items . Your dwelling -LRB- Coverage A -RRB- is perhaps the most important item that is insured . Unattached structures along with the personal property inside the home are covered on a standard home policy . The expenses you incur while living away from the home during a covered claim are also covered along with liability , medical payments to others . There may also be various riders , depending on the items and benefits that were important to you . As an experienced broker for more than three decades , it is our job to explain these benefits , and provide the lowest rates possible in your area , so you can compare the best options .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Home Insurance may cover appliances in home ; there are 2 types of appliances , those that are fitted and those that are free standing . Fitted appliances constitute part of the Dwelling Coverage on the home insurance policy , whereas , free standing appliances may be covered under the Personal Property Coverage on the home insurance policy . The perils covered under a home insurance policy must be reviewed regarding the damage to the appliances . For example , Fire , Smoke , Lightning & Water damage may be covered on the policy which would also carry forward to the appliances . Regarding free standing appliances , the policy must afford coverage for Personal Property . If this question was intended for the reason of upkeep and maintenance of appliances , home insurance policies are not intended to repair or replace appliances due to maintenance and/or breakdown . Home insurance is intended for sudden and accidental losses which could cause financial hardship to the homeowner . If you wish to cover your appliances , you may wish topurchase a Home Warranty Contract from a small handful of carriers who offer a maintenance contract ; in this case , you will pay an annual premium as well as a Service Charge for each call when a repair company is dispatched to take care of a covered maintenance situation . If your question was indeed regarding perils covered on a homeowners policy , you may wish to contact your local agent and review the coverage on your policy or WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your coverage for you at no charge .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
This is a very relevant question because there is not a black-and-white answer to it . Lets suppose you have a family where mom does stay at home with the kids . Tragically , she dies . What is the best possible thing that can happen with these kids ? Really , its for dad to stay home with them . Theyve already lost mom . They are going to need their dad more than they ever have . He is THE parent . Dad may want to keep working and hire a Mary Poppins-type nanny , but that is the second best solution by far . He really should stay home from work to the greatest extent possible and just connect and bond and nurture and comfort these kids through what may be the most devastating occurrence in their life . Obviously , he will need money to be able to afford to stay home . That is what I think is the number one function of life insurance on a stay-at-home mom . This is a hard sell to insurance companies these days , because they keep thinking in terms of percentage of the wager earners coverage , and on and on . But if I get a couple who really want dad to stay home if the family does lose mom , I fight hard to get them a policy to make that happen .
Homeowners Insurance and Title Insurance are not the same . Title insurance is insurance to make sure the title of the home is clean . For example you are purchasing a home from Mr. Doe . The title company is to make sure all information is accurate such as who is the seller , boundaries are correct and so on . If you purchased the home from Mr. Doe and you find out later there also was a MS. Doe who says I never gave permission to sell the home now there is a problem and title insurance would step in to cover this situation . Homeowners insurance is what you purchase to cover your actual dwelling and property , liability etc. . . for a potential loss .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Most Home Insurance policies will only cover a vacant or unoccupied home for a short time -LRB- 60 or 90 days -RRB- before they impose coverage limitations . I have seen policies with much higher deductible for `` vacant '' homes . Most wo n't cover burst plumbing or theft/vandalism if the house is ruled vacant at the time of a claim . If you have a vacation home , most seasonal home policies understand that the house will be unoccupied for large periods of time , and address that in their coverage terms . There are vacant home policies that are designed for unoccupied homes . If your home is for sale , or has been unoccupied for a long periodic time I suggest you talk to an insurance agent about getting a vacant home policy . Foremost Insurance and Vacant Express are two companies that specialize in vacant home coverage .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
This is a difficult question to answer without viewing your specific policy and the coverages contained in it . Is a water heater covered within a policy , generally yes . It just depends on what happens . For example , general wear and tare is not covered under the standard homeowners policy ; however , if you adding coverage for appliances or household items -LRB- that would have cost you more each year -RRB- or you pay for a home warranty , it could be covered for wear and tare . If the damage is from a busted pipe that occurred by no fault of your own or was from a power surge , it could be protected if the policy is setup correctly . It does come down to what exactly you have your policy and within the policy what the limits are . If you have a home warranty program that is always the best way to go because claims with the warranty companies will not result in higher premiums for your homeowners policy , but if you take a claim against your homeowners for the coverage -LRB- EVEN if it is n't covered -RRB- it could result in a slight increase in your prices for next year . If the cost is less than your deductible it would n't benefit you to make a claim on the home policy either .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
All homeowners policies cover claims that result in the damage or destruction of covered property do to accidents . Your home policy does cover the damage to your home and personal property due to your furnace . But remember , the claim will not cover the repair or replacement of the furnace itself . Home insurance is not a repair and maintenance insurance . It only covers damage to your property as the result of an accident and will not cover the replacement or repair of items in your home . If you have any other questions about this subject please feel free to call me .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- cover some part-time home health services such as physical therapy , skilled nursing care , speech-language pathology servcies , etc. . Medicare does not pay for 24 hour home health care however , nor meals delivered to your home , personal care , and homemaker services . Please note , there are a number of conditions that must be met for Medicare to cover your home health care . If you need more than part-time/intermittent home care , Medicare will not cover the expenses . Home health care is very expensive and you can deplete your savings paying for it . For someone wanting 24-hour home health care to be covered by their insurance , they should look into securing a long-term care insurance policy . While long-term care can be an expensive type of insurance to have , you 're paying pennies on the dollar if you needed to make a claim on the coverage . There 's many moving parts to long-term care insurance . If you 're looking to secure this type of coverage , it 's most helpful to consult with an experienced broker to help build a policy that will best serve your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Is Renters Insurance Necessary ?
Necessary is a matter of perspective . I believe that renters insurance is necessary for every person renting a premise . Renters insurance will not only provide protection for your personal property in the event of a covered loss but also provides liability protection in the event that someone is injured in your residence just to name a couple of the major coverages . Contact a local agent to find out more about all of the advantages of having this coverage .
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Necessary is a matter of perspective . I believe that renters insurance is necessary for every person renting a premise . Renters insurance will not only provide protection for your personal property in the event of a covered loss but also provides liability protection in the event that someone is injured in your residence just to name a couple of the major coverages . Contact a local agent to find out more about all of the advantages of having this coverage .
Why is health insurance necessary ? Actually it 's not necessary , at least for another year . In 2014 changes will be coming . But as of today , health insurance is not necessary to have . You can self insure . The thing is if you self insure and have claims , you 're expected to pay them . So you would have to surrender assests to pay that bill . Insurance of ANY KIND is simply a form of liquid money to pay for things so that your other invested wealth can `` stay '' invested . So no insurance is never necessary , it just is a smart solution for some issues .
A good Renters Insurance Company is one that is well rated , financially stable and provides the necessary coverage for your Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- and ample Personal Liability Coverage . We recommend sufficient contents coverage to replace your furniture , appliances and clothing and also the highest available personal liability coverage available ; in many cases the premium difference between the minimum and maximum amount of liability may be as little as $ 35 per yeardepending on the geographic location of the insured risk . Should you be seeking a lower premium , we suggest raising the deductible rather than lowering your necessary coverage . Taking a little more risk on the front end will prove to lower your premium substantially as the majority of longer term insured customers take the higher deductible options , enjoy a lower premium and thus remain loyal to the respective carrier for a long time . There is a link available to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States.for those that would rather shop the riskand buy insurance online without the personal interaction of an insurance agent , this may prove very helpful.An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
To be specific about what health insurance does not cover , you would have to check your plan 's policy 's exclusions & limitations . However , if you 're asking a general question , I think the key term here is `` medically necessary '' . If your provider bills a service as medically necessary , then it would generally be covered . From a common sense standpoint , why would an insurance company cover something that 's not medically necessary . A good example of something that 's not medically necessary is cosmetic surgery .
Insurance may be required by your landlord . Otherwise insurance is never necessary . If you are able to sustain a large lawsuit with ease , then you dont need a renters policy . If your rental unit burns to the ground and you lose everything that you have in it , and it wouldnt even merit an entry in your check book , then you dont need a renters policy . If you dont need a friend to stand with you with money in their hand when things really go wrong , then you dont need a renters policy .
Unfortunately there is no magic formula for recommendations on renters insurance , each policy can be as unique as the person purchasing it . The typical major components of renters insurance are liability coverage , personal property coverage , loss of use coverage , and any endorsements that are necessary to provide higher limits of coverage for specific items . Contact a local agent to discuss your needs and wants when it comes to a renters policy they will be able to explain the coverages available allowing you to make a more informed decision .
Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met ; days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 152 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Qualifications to receive the Medicare SNF benefit : 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Although a Medicare plan may cover SNF copayments , given the qualification restrictions for the Medicare SNF benefit , Medicare beneficiaries should consider separate Short Term Care nursing facility coverage to manage the financial risk of an uncovered SNF stay .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Renters Insurance is available from a number of companies in several different States ! The Best Renters Insurance would depend on how you would define ` Best ' ! If you seek the most affordable premium , we would recommend Stillwater Insurance Group , rated A - Excellent by A.M. Best , licensed and admitted in all 50 States and offering a very affordable renters insurance policy . Stillwater Insurance offers an Home Insurance Online platform whereby the consumer can obtain a quote and purchase the insurance all directly in one transaction . It is important that the correct amount of Personal Property Coverage , Personal Liability Coverage and applicable Deductible are requested . To fairly offer an excellent insurance package , we always recommend the necessary coverage for Personal Property coupled with the highest Personal Liability together with a high deductible ; this will offer you great coverage at a low premium rate . To take advantage of the online platform , you may Click the following link : WEBSITELINK If you have any question about coverage or wish to inquire further about options , you should contact your local insurance professional and spend a few valuable moments exploring further about this valuable coverage .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Breast augmentation is generally considered a cosmetic procdure and not a medically necessary procedure , therefore , it is usually not covered . Breast reduction can be considered medically necessary and covered by health insurance if the breasts are causing back and neck issues . If it is considered medically necessary the surgery is covered once a woman is 18 years old and an adult .
Most health insurance will only pay for breast reductions if it is medically necessary . Medically necessary is a subjective term . For example if you want breast reduction surgery for cosmetic reasons it would not be covered . If on the other hand if you were 5 ' 2 '' and needed reduction surgery to ease back issues posture and pain it may be medically necessary . You should check with you doctor , read your Evidence of Coverage and check with the insurance company .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
You can certainly get renters insurance to cover belongings in a dorm room , but you probably do n't need it . Most college students would be covered by their parents homeowners policy when they leave for college , so renters insurance would n't be necessary . I would recommend you have your parents check with their agent and make sure , but nearly every homeowners policy would have this coverage .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Is Auto Insurance ?
The premium charged for auto insurance is computed differently depending upon the state . In California the rate is based on the year , make and model of the vehicle and its intended use . It is further based upon the annual mileage for the vehicle . It is also based on the driving records of all the members of the household where the auto is insured . There are other considerations but those are the major factors .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
You can have two auto policies but not on the same car . I have many clients that own small business and they have a business auto policy and a personal auto policy which then gives them a multi policy discount on the personal auto and cost them much less per auto and the business auto they use the insurance premium as a business expense on their taxes .
That 's an interesting question - do you mean how much coverage do you need to purchase to ensure the value of your belongings are covered adequately , or how much should the policy have paid out to you after your claim was processed ? In the case of coverage , you would need to have an idea of how much value there is to be insured . For example , do you have a lot of electronics , or jewelry ? If so , you would need more coverage than someone who has very few of those things . If you meant how much should you have received , that depends on a lot of things specific to your policy and claim . If you would like more information , I 'd be happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does A Life Insurance Urine Test Test For ?
Urinalysis -LRB- UA -RRB- is used by life insurance companies to detect presence of disease when applying for medically underwritten policies . Urine tests used can point to the possibility of kidney disease , UTI , diabetes , liver disease , inflammation , even cancer . Sometimes excessive exercise or dieting can affect the HOS , so try to drink a lot of water , avoid alcohol , eat balanced meals , and avoid excessive exercise in the days before your urine test . Life insurance also uses urine to test for drug and tobacco use . If you use opoids -LRB- codeine , morphine , methadone , etc -RRB- for pain , or marijuana for medical or recreational use , explain that on your application or to the examiner collecting your urine sample . And keep in mind that cotinine -LRB- a metabolite of nicotine that is detected in urine and blood -RRB- can stay in the body for a long time after using tobacco . It is best to disclose all health conditions , medications , and tobacco use to your agent ahead of time , rather than have it be a surprise on your life insurance exam . That way you can be matched with the company that will give you the best rate , your underwriter will rate you as good as possible due to your honesty , and your policy will pay out if something happens to you .
A urine test is one of the easiest and affordable ways a life insurance underwriter can take a `` snap shot '' of a person 's health . It is usually required when purchasing fullyunderwritten life insurance . The most common things the underwriter is looking for is diabetes , proteins and drug use among other indicators that blood either will not show or is more expensive to test for than urine . Underwriters give actuaries the best odds of whether a person is a higher risk to die at a certain age than average .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
What tests are run for life insurance depends on the coverage applied for and vary somewhat by company . For smaller amounts there may just be a non-medical declaration and depending on whether or not anything is declared there may be no testing . If urine , and/or blood , is required , testing could include testing for bodily functions . The presence of raised levels of certain substances , such as sugar in urine , would trigger more tests . In addition , testing is done for nicotine and for traces of illegal drugs . X-rays , electrocardiograms or other tests could also be required . It is very important to be truthful when completing an application for insurance . If you have a medical condition you are concerned about , then experience and independence are important . I suggest working with a local agent/broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life insurance companies use a urine test , blood test , physical measurements and possibly a resting EKG to evaluate your overall health and your risk of death . A urine test is most commonly used to test for drugs or alcohol , but may also be used to test for certain medical conditions . A larger death benefit may require additional testing .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
MetLife offers life insurance that does drug test , and it also offers nonmed life insurance that does not drug test . The applications for both types of policies will ask if there has been illegal drug use in the past . One policy does a blood test and urine test , while the other just goes by what is on the application , which must be filled out honestly to prevent insurance fraud .
Yes , life insurance does test for the byproduct of nicotine , called cotinine , in the urine and/or blood that is tested for a life insurance exam . Cotinine is a more reliable indicator of actually smoking a cigarette than nicotine is , as sometimes nicotine tests can detect second hand smoke . With tobacco such as cigar or pipe , a very few companies will disregard cotinine in the blood or urine as long as it it disclosed on the application and there has been no cigarette usage in the past few years . Other than that , the insured person who tests positive for nicotine/cotinine will be rated as a Smoker .
Urinalysis -LRB- UA -RRB- is used by life insurance companies to detect presence of disease when applying for medically underwritten policies . Urine tests used can point to the possibility of kidney disease , UTI , diabetes , liver disease , inflammation , even cancer . Sometimes excessive exercise or dieting can affect the HOS , so try to drink a lot of water , avoid alcohol , eat balanced meals , and avoid excessive exercise in the days before your urine test . Life insurance also uses urine to test for drug and tobacco use . If you use opoids -LRB- codeine , morphine , methadone , etc -RRB- for pain , or marijuana for medical or recreational use , explain that on your application or to the examiner collecting your urine sample . And keep in mind that cotinine -LRB- a metabolite of nicotine that is detected in urine and blood -RRB- can stay in the body for a long time after using tobacco . It is best to disclose all health conditions , medications , and tobacco use to your agent ahead of time , rather than have it be a surprise on your life insurance exam . That way you can be matched with the company that will give you the best rate , your underwriter will rate you as good as possible due to your honesty , and your policy will pay out if something happens to you .
Life insurance tests urine for medically underwritten life insurance policies to detect drug and nicotine usage , among other things . Urinalyses can show evidence of diabetes -LRB- or poor diabetic control -RRB- , renal disease , cancer , blood disorders , or infection . Not all life insurance policies require a urine test ; nonmed policies do not perform blood or urine tests .
The tests that are done for a medically underwritten life insurance policy are a blood test and urine test . Blood and urine samples are tested for HIV , drug use , nicotine use , and to see whether the applicant has possible disease of the kidney , liver , stomach , heart and other organs .
Life insurance companies test urine for a number of things . It is a more affordable way than to test blood . However , depending on your age and face amount it is likely they will test both . Urine tests show drug , both prescription and illegal use , as well as nicotine/cotine for tobacco use . They also can find evidence of diabetes , heart issues , cancer and kidney disease .
Most health insurance applications do not require blood or urine specimens . But on occasion an underwriter will ask for a physical exam including certain tests . If you have a history of abnormal test results in the past , such as high cholesterol counts , or blood or sugar in your urine , testing may be requested . Sometimes an underwriter will request an EKG if you had cardiac tests in the past that were abnormal .
Life insurance carriers that require a blood and/or urine test to get a medically underwritten policy will test for indication of drug use . Some carriers , including Met Life , offer the option of a policy that does not require a blood or urine test . However , those carriers then usually require that the use of illegal substances be admitted on the application .
When applying for a policy that uses medical underwriting , most life insurance companies test for smoking through both a urine test and a blood test on samples collected during the life insurance exam . If you are purchasing a policy that does not require taking an exam , neither of these tests are done .
Only policies that use medical underwriting will test you for drug use through a blood and/or urine test . Simplified issue policies do not order blood tests , but they usually do ask about drug use on your life insurance application . Guaranteed issue life insurance does not ask about drug use on your application , nor does it test for it . However , the minimum age for guaranteed issue life insurance is usually at least 40 years old . If the drug use that you are referring to is marijuana , that generally is not a problem , if you apply with the right companies . Using marijuana after a recent DUI or after treatment for addiction is problematic . And of course , using cocaine , meth or heroin makes it difficult to get all but the most lenient -LRB- and therefore , most expensive -RRB- of life insurance policies . Talk to a life insurance agency that you can trust to find out what type of policy is workable for you , at the lowest possible price . They are bound to privacy and no insurance company will see your name unless you actually apply for the policy .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test If you 're an older individuals -LRB- e.g. age 55 -RRB- , some carriers may also ask for an EKG to be completed with the other exam requirements . If you 're a senior -LRB- e.g. age 70 -RRB- , some carriers may ask you to complete a mature assessment -LRB- congnitive and physical movement testing - e.g. memory tests , walk a distance , etc. -RRB- . Exams typically take no more than a half hour or so and can be completed in the privacy of your own home -LRB- some people prefer their work place which is also acceptable -RRB- . You do n't have to go to a doctor 's office or a clinic to have the exams done . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . Please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A life insurance urine test along with a blood test with larger policies are checking for two categories . The first series is looking for drugs , both illegal and prescription to test against medical records for abuse . Underwriting will test for nicotine and cotine , which stays in the system longer than just nicotine for tobacco use . The second set of tests are used to check for diseases like cancer , diabetes , heart disease , blood disorders , kidney disease , etc. . These results are usually compared to the individuals medical records for their risk assessment .
While life insurance does not test directly for cancer , the blood or urine test can reveal labs that might point to cancer . Total blood count -LRB- showing excessively high or low white or red blood cell counts -RRB- would be the most obvious , but abnormal liver labs or even high protein in the urine could be examples of other tests that COULD indicate cancer . That is why , if labs are abnormal , insurance companies will often postpone until you can get a diagnosis for those results . Once the condition is treated , they will pick up where they left off .
For their life insurance policies that have medical underwriting , Farm Bureau does drug test for life insurance . Farm Bureau also offers simplified issue life insurance that usually does not require any testing of bodily fluids . When no oral swabs , bleed tests or urine tests are done , there is no drug testing done . However , there are questions about drug use on the application .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Can Life Insurance Be An Investment ?
If by `` investment '' , you mean something that may gain or lose value , then the only type of life insurance that I would consider an investment is Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- . The interest credited to a VUL policy is based on stocks & bonds and may be positive or negative for the year . There are other types of life insurance that can accumulate cash called whole life and universal life policies . I consider these savings vehicles rather than investment vehicles because they do not lose money due to a decrease in the stock market or index . Whole Life insurance accumulates cash by dividends that are declared by the life insurance company . Universal life , other than VUL , comes in a fixed and an indexed universal life option . The Fixed UL earns interest based on a rate declared by the insurance company . The Indexed option -LRB- IUL -RRB- earns interest based on the performance of an index such as the S & P. With an IUL , there is usually a floor of 0 - 2 % that protects the cash value if the index is negative . The nice thing about an IUL is that you participate in the upside of the market without the downside risk . These are complex products and it is important to speak with a knowledgeable advisor who can educate you on the fees and other particulars .
An investment needs time to appreciate . Life insurance guarantees values while you wait for other investments to grow . Most investments have upside and downside risks . Life insurance is guaranteed . The stated values will be there when you need them . Investments are a part of the estate of a deceased . Life insurance passes outside probate and goes directly to the person you want to have the money .
That is a great question ! I think that there is a lot of confusion about investments and life insurance . Life insurance is a very important part of a healthy financial plan , but should not be considered as an investment in a technical sense . Let me explain it like this : A healthy financial plan is composed of two basic parts - income builders , and protections . Your income builders are hopefully your stocks , 401k 's , annuities , bonds , etc. . The protectors are your insurances , and emergency savings account . You will not derive any income in most cases from any insurance policy -LRB- There are policies that are hyped as revenue building , but carefully read the fine print , and you will see that often the gains are built on optimistic returns , and large investments on your part , and have a substantial risk attached -RRB- as you will no longer be around to receive it . It will provide that income to whomever you chose as your beneficiary . So the only fair way to describe life insurance as an investment is to say that it is an investment in your loved ones ' financial safety , and in your peace of mind knowing that you 've protected them from harm , even after you 've passed . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
can life insurance be used as an investment ? Yes , it can . Life insurance has been used as an investment for hundreds of years . While there are some who try very hard to tell you why it 's not an investment , they always seem to never get around to talking about RISK and how there are different levels of risk with different types of investment . Usually , when beating up life insurance , a equity is used with a hypothetical 12 % return on the equity . They never talk about Risk and what role it plays in an investment . Choice A pays 5 % return steady over time , chugs along never goes backward , even in a down marketand has a .001 % chance of failure . Choice B can pay 30 % return in any given year or lose 30 % in any given year . It can go backwards , it can double extremely fast and it has a much higher potential for failure . Which should you own ? How about Both ? One is a safety net which allows you to accept more risk with another choice which can reward you for your efforts . However if it fails to live up to it 's potential , the other safer route keeps you from losing everything . So yes , life insurance can be used as an investment , should it be your only choice ? no , not really , no more than straight equities should be either . Hope this makes sense .
Can life insurance be sold as an investment ? Short answer `` yes '' . Now the difficult part , define investment ? Does life insurance fit the current version of the definition of the word investment ? I say current version because what is and what is n't an investment has changed over the years . Now days investment as a definition carries far more RISK in it than can be found in a traditional cash value life policy . Should life insurance be a part of a person 's investment portfolio ? In most cases yes as life insurance can be part of a financial plan that fits a person 's risk tolerances . But life insurance should n't be primarily sold as an investment . State insurance offices frown upon it , yet an entire segment has been set up to sell life policies on other people as investments for the death benefits .
I am going to answer this question as someone who sells whole life and universal life only . I do not sell variable life insurance , which is typically considered an investment . First of all , I think the word `` investment '' does not really apply to life insurance , regardless of the type of product . This is because life insurance is first and foremost intended to provide a benefit to survivors . Any cash it develops is nice to have , but it is secondary . The first priority in buying life insurance should be getting the most attractive premium for the entire time you need coverage . Even with very aggressive underwriting , that cost can be higher than the costs associated with conventional investment products . Now , life insurance does have specific tax advantages . These include tax-deferred cash accumulation , and income-tax free benefits . You should speak with your tax advisor for more details . If the insured is young enough , and qualifies for a low enough rate , and is in a high-enough tax bracket , then the cost of his life insurance might be lower than the taxes he would pay on an investment outside life insurance . Here life insurance may be considered a smart `` investment . '' In most other cases , life insurance would not be a smart investment . But , with a strong product from a strong company , the guaranteed cash value in a whole life or universal life product could be significant . You could get more bang for your buck inside life insurance that you would from a standard conservative investment . For that reason , people do use life insurance as the guaranteed or conservative part of their financial portfolio .
Life insurance is not an investment at all . It 's protection . To be considered an investment , the product MUST have risk to your principle amount paid . That means even if you carry out the terms of the contract , you can still lose some or all of your principle and get nothing in return for it . The reason you would do this is to have the opportunity that the investment will go well and return MORE than you paid in . Life insurance does not work that way . It can never legally be called an investment . One form of life insurance -LRB- Variable Life -RRB- has the cash accounts invested but the life insurance component of the product is still not an investment . No investment will do what life insurance does for you . You should never confuse your life insurance needs with your investment needs .
Cash values life insurance can be a savings or investment policy depending upon which crediting method is used and how the policy is designed . There are three saving life insurance policies : Participating whole life insurance , current assumption universal life insurance and indexed universal life insurance . There is one investment life insurance policy that uses a crediting method of separate sub accounts with equity and bond allocations : Variable universal life . The performance of a life insurance policy as a savings or investment policy may depend on the policy design . That design must use the lowest cost of insurance death benefit option that complies with the TAMRA regulations to contain the policy expense . If designed correctly , life insurance can be a great savings or investment policy that can generate tax free retirement income as long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured .
Whole Life insurance is not an investment , it is a way to provide an immediate estate and a systematic way to save money in a very tax favorable way . Whole life provides a sound foundation for a good investment portfolio . The amount of the Whole Life would depend on your personal goals and financial situation . While buy term and invest the difference is a great idea , the reality is that most people who buy term never follow through on investing the difference . Life happens , emergencies come up and the money that was to be invested gets used for other things . This is fact based on statistics . If you want to invest , invest . If you want insurance that will be there when you will need it most , buy Whole Life insurance . Never put all your eggs in one basket . A base of Whole Life with added term insurance for your life insurance needs and sound investments to top off the portfolio is a safe sound way to accumulate cash for retirement and providing for final expense and a legacy for your family
One type of life insurance -LRB- variable life insurance -RRB- has an investment component but no life insurance itself is NEVER an investment . Life insurance is guaranteed protection . An investment is risk . Without risk the product can NOT be considered an investment . This is not a bad thing . It 's a good thing . Life insurance does what it was designed to do better than any investment ever could . You will find a few agents that will call life insurance an investment to make a sale . Those who get caught at it are subject to huge fines and can lose their license to sell insurance . It is considered very misleading and the Department of Insurance of your state should be contacted if you ever have an agent telling you such a thing .
Nope . Life insurance can not be an investment . Think about this question for a second . What is the most essential element in an investment ? It is time . Some investments need time to mature . Other investments need time to increase in value . Example : if you are invested in the stock market , and your investment decreases in value , what should you do ? Should you sell ? Of course not . You would sustain the loss only if you redeem the shares at a lower price than when you bought them . What you should do is let them ride , and if properly managed , they should recoup their value , and then some . Over time . If you die , then you could pass this investment on to a family member , and that person could continue to manage the fund . It could continue to grow in value . Over time , during his or her lifetime . Does life insurance buy you this kind of time ? Absolutely not . The product is designed in just the opposite way . It assumes you will run out of time tomorrow . You get the biggest bang for the buck when a death benefit is paid immediately . Somebody could conceivably buy a policy today , pay one monthly premium , and then die . The beneficiary would receive the entire survivor benefit . Would you call something an investment if it required no time to realize value ? Nope . Or that is guaranteed to pay out , for that matter ? Lets talk about that guarantee for a second . Of all the forms of insurance you might buy , the only one you know for sure will pay a benefit is life insurance . This is because you know for sure you are going to die . You could buy medical insurance , but never get sick . You could buy disability insurance , but never get hurt . You could buy auto insurance , but never have a car accident . You could buy professional liability insurance , but never get sued . You could buy home insurance , but never have a fire . And on and on . However , if you hold on to that life insurance policy , you know your survivors will get paid . For sure . So , life insurance is a uniquely wonderful risk management tool that requires no time at all to realize value , and is absolutely guaranteed . With these characteristics , it meets nobodys definition of an investment . Now : I am sure you know that certain life insurance products can produce cash value . Whole life , universal life . Even term can carry a return of premium feature . But these funds are not to be considered investments . They should be seen as added value . As ways to partially offset your cost . As an extra benefit . They make the purchase of a policy extra attractive . But you should never assume that they will have time to grow . They will disappear as soon as a claim is filed and a benefit paid . And that could be tomorrow .
Why invest in whole life insurance ? Well it is one of the few insurance products that you actually control , not the insurance carrier . That is a big reason why whole life insurance is expensive compared to other life products . The insurance company bears the risk of the contract as they can not alter or change the terms of the contract , they can not raise the price of the policy in later years and must receive the policy owners permission to do anything to the policy . What a whole life offers is a decent return for the safety it provides the policy holder . There is very little investment risk to a whole life policy compared to other places where a person can put money . This also is reflected in the return . If you had money invested in 2008 you learned first hand about investment risk . That said , while the rest of my investments were losing 40 % my whole life gained value . You ca n't go backwards with a whole life which makes it a good part of anybody 's planning . I call whole life the most boring investment a person can make . Why ? it does what it says it will do .
An annuity is a contract with an insurance company . The company invests the funds it receives in a variety of ways . The annuitant , you , can choose how that money is to be invested or you can rely upon the company to invest the funds . If you chose to have the company invest the funds , the company will provide you with guarantees in the contract . If you select the investments , the results are not guaranteed .
That is a great question ! In fact , it 's really the multimillion dollar question ! That is the hard part about choosing the right mutual fund , knowing what they are invested in , and how the investments are performing . A mutual fund that was heavily invested in technology stocks this year would have taken a beating -LRB- some lost very large amounts -RRB- , while mutual funds invested in a mix of bonds and energy stocks would have had a good return . The best thing to do is really look into the fund , its investments and its returns , before you invest in it . Be certain to have your broker clearly explain all fees to you ! Many funds charge fees that can significantly reduce your earnings , and leave you with little more than you started with . Be careful , ok ? Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! The role of the adviser is supposed to be as a guide to helping you select the best funds for your desired goals in your portfolio . They are to work with you in selecting funds that are a fit for your goals in risk allowance , growth potential , and fee structures . They are supposed to be experts in identifying well performing funds , trends , and emerging investments . Many of them are very good , and have clients that are well prepared for retirement . There are many of them that are paid by their brokerage house for the specific funds they want sold , and for the commissions and profits earned for the brokerage . Their focus may not then be so much on your needs as it is theirs , and that 's been the industry rub . The high fees hidden in the fund structure has led to an increasing number of investors switching to indexed funds -LRB- like Vanguard -RRB- or moving away from the brokerage houses and purchasing their leading stock investments themselves , and eliminating the fees and middlemen . Nobody likes to see that the person who is supposed to be making you money is making more off you than you are making . If you choose to invest in a mutual fund that has an adviser , please be sure to meet with them face to face . Interview them before investing . Ask about how they are paid , what the fees are for the fund , and real life performance on the fund , not projections . Ask how often the stocks within the portfolio are exchanged -LRB- anything close to 100 % is risky for you - they make money for the brokerage on the exchanges , increasing fundholders ' expense -RRB- . Shop for your mutual fund very wisely , before investing a penny . For all the touted returns , according to a recent DALBAR report , the average equities investor has only realized a 4.4 % return -LRB- for a 20 year study concluded in 2007 -RRB- , under-performing the S&P by more than 7 % , and after inflation , returning only 1.44 % . Do your homework , and look carefully before investing , okay ? Please do as we do - if the interview leaves you with more questions than answers , if you had a bad feeling about it , or if you felt that the adviser was elusive in their answers , thank them for their time , and move on . Again , like in any business , some are good , some not so much ; but it 's your future and your money , not theirs , so treat it accordingly . Please feel free to contact me if you have any specific questions , okay ? Thank you for asking !
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
Where are annuities invested ? Well the way to find out is review the insurance company that you bought from financials . There you can get an idea of where they invest to support the annuities they sell . Usually annuities will be invested in safe investments because they have a guaranteed return . The advantage insurance companies possess is the size of the investment . When investing millions to billions they can get a better interest rate on their money compared to someone wanting to invest a few thousand .
Definitely , despite what some misinformed advisers may tell you . Whole Life first of all was never designed as an investment . While it is true you can accumulate more cash by buying term and investing the difference , my experience has shown that in most cases the average person , no matter how well intentioned , fails to keep up with the investment part . Investments are taxable as well whereas Whole Life is very tax friendly . I have seen many people in their 70 's and 80 's lose their life savings because of the high cost of long term care . Without life insurance they would have had nothing to help pay for the final expenses , leaving their families in a financial bind . For some people the cash value in their life insurance is the only savings they really have . I always recommend at least enough whole life to pay final expenses , allowing for inflation . If purchased at a young age it is not that expensive . After forming your insurance foundation , then you can begin accumulating cash using a combination of term and investments . Whole life insurance provides an excellent safety net for the average individual .
Whole life insurance is never an investment let alone a `` good '' investment . Life insurance should always be separate from your investment portfolio and this will not only give you a much better rate of return on your investment but more flexibility in you investment options . This is why term life insurance makes better sense then invest outside of that .
That is a great question ! Like all investments , for some the investment is the greatest thing since sliced bread , and for others that same investment is like a tack in your shoe . Life insurance is really not an investment per se , as it is n't going to make you any money ; it will pay to your beneficiary , and you will receive none of it , as you wo n't be here . Many people are led to think of life insurance as an investment in that sense , but it truly is n't . It is an investment in peace of mind , you are assured that your family will be provided for when you pass and your whole life policy pays them . But other than leaving a chunk of tax free money behind , you are n't going to see any returns from your policy . If you have large amounts of money laying around that you can pass on to your loved ones tax free and probate safe , you do n't need life insurance at all . If you do n't , then a whole life policy is a good `` investment '' in the protection of your family , and in your peace of mind . I hope that helps , please feel free to contact me with any questions that you may have , okay ? Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is A Life Insurance Trust Fund ?
A Life Insurance Trust Fund is a trust that holds a life insurance policy or policies . The fund actually does not hold cash except what exists in the policy , and the only cash paid into it is to pay the premiums of the policy and cover any expenses the trust may incur . It is upon the death of the Grantor-Insured that the death benefit is paid to the trust and distributed according to the terms set forth in the trust .
That is an excellent question ! The Medicare system is funded by two trust funds . The first , the Hospital Insurance Trust Fund , is made up of payroll taxes , Medicare A premiums from those who do n't get it free , and investment income . The second , the Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust fund is made up of Government grants , the premiums paid in forMedicare part B , and investment income . Unless the cuts to the administrative overhead and fraud recaptures are what the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- expects them to be , because of the trust fund raiding and cuts that Congress has done over the years , the trusts are expected to go dry in 2024 . With the money captured by the ACA , the trusts are solvent to 2029 . Either way , there needs to be a change , as nearly 10,000 Americans become eligible for Medicare benefits every day , and the trusts are too depleted to support the costs . Thanks for asking !
Generally speaking a life insurance policy is used to fund the trust . The trust spells out the conditions upon which the money can be paid out . For exam a Funeral Trust uses a life insurance policy that uses the trust as the beneficiary . The terms of the trust state that the funds can only be used to pay for matters related to final expenses . The life insurance policy is just the funding vehicle , the trust is the legal document specifying how those funds are used .
That is an excellent question !! Medicare is managed by a department of the Federal Government called the CMS - the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services . It falls under the wing of the Department of Health and Human Services , and it manages the trust funds that fuel Medicare and Medicaid . There are two trust funds - one that is funded by payroll taxes , and by other taxes , investments , and earned interest . The other one is funded by Congress , premiums paid on Medicare B and D , investments and interest earned . Congressional cuts to the programs have hurt one fund , and the one that is funded by the payroll taxes is in danger of becoming underfunded within the next 20 years -LRB- 2029 , last estimate , with the additional funds culled from excesses in the program recaptured by the Affordable Care Act , AKA Obamacare - without them , 2024 -RRB- because the workforce is steadily shrinking -LRB- less collected tax -RRB- as the number of senior citizens eligible for Medicare and Medicaid increases -LRB- approximately 10,000 people turn 65 daily -RRB- . It does n't help that the Government in the past has raided the Social Security and Medicare trusts to fund other things that they felt were more important . I hope that that answers your question , if you would like more detail give me a buzz , and I 'll give you more . Thank you for asking !
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A Life Insurance Trust Fund is a trust that holds a life insurance policy or policies . The fund actually does not hold cash except what exists in the policy , and the only cash paid into it is to pay the premiums of the policy and cover any expenses the trust may incur . It is upon the death of the Grantor-Insured that the death benefit is paid to the trust and distributed according to the terms set forth in the trust .
A life insurance trust is a legal instrument that is normally used as an estate planning tool . A funded trust owns the life insurance policy and the assets to pay -LRB- fund -RRB- the premiums . The trust is both the owner and beneficiary in most cases . When establishing any trust , including a life insurance trust , you should consult with a qualified estate attorney . Creating the trust can be anywhere from a few hundred dollars to several thousand , depending on the complexity of the estate .
Minors can certainly be named as a beneficiary to an insurance policy . But what you want to consider is what the purpose of the insurance is . If you want the insurance to cover your final and burial expenses then you may not want to name a minor because he or she will not have access to the money until age 18 or 21 depending on where you live . If the purpose is to leave a legacy for the minor , the best thing to do is create a living trust . Name the trust as the beneficiary and earmark those funds for the minor . A living trust is very flexible . You can basically say when and for what reason the minor can have access to the funds . You can say that money can be paid for the minors private education ; you can say the minor gets 25 % at age 21 , etc. . And the best part is whatever you have specified ca n't be changed after your passing AND the trust does not go through probate . So , there is no court intervention or delays .
An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries .
Some people set up life insurance trusts to transfer the money out of their estate , so that their heirs will not have to pay estate taxes on the life insurance proceeds -LRB- if the estate is over the amount exempt from estate taxes -RRB- . This is called an irrevocable life insurance trust and it transfers ownership of the policy to the trust . Some people use Life Insurance Trusts to give money to charity , fund their child 's or grandchild 's education , or distribute funds to their beneficiaries in the manner they best see fit .
The most common trusts you see when looking at it in relation to life insurance is a revocable or irrevocable life insurance trust . When using a trust with life insurance , the trust will be the owner and beneficiary of the policy - whoever the trust is on will be the insured . When completing the application , you 're entering in the trust 's information -LRB- name of trust , date it was created , etc. -RRB- in the owner and beneficiary sections - some applications may have a separate trust information page to include as well . The carrier will also ask for a copy of the first several pages of the trust -LRB- needed for verification purposes -RRB- . The trustee of the trust will be the person signing the paperwork where it asks for signature of owner .
The type of trust that is referred to as a life insurance trust is called an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . The owner of the life insurance must be the trust , so it is important to get the ILIT set up correctly . Not all trusts that are used for life insurance are Irrevocable Life Insurance Trusts . But that is the one most people are referring to when they talk about a life insurance trust .
If it is the insured person 's estate who you are trying to protect , the insured person can not be trustee of an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . Any power to administer or change the trust is considered incidences of ownership , and thus defeats the purpose of the trust -LRB- which is to transfer ownership of the life insurance from the estate to the trust for tax purposes -RRB- . If it is a survivorship policy with your spouse , your spouse can not be trustee , either . In fact , if your spouse is beneficiary of the trust and is name trustee , your spouse needs to have a co-trustee for distribution of discretionary funds , It may be better to name a professional as trustee of the trust , although technically almost anyone can do it , with the exceptions noted above .
In short , when it 's part of the calculation of the estate . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property to a spouse without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy . The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Charitable annuities are traditionally set up by a grantor who gifts a sum of money to a trust established with a charitable organization as the beneficiary . The trustee of the trust then purchases an annuity with the funds and pays the grantor a sum of money based on an amount specified when the gift and trust are established . The grantor receives a tax deduction for the gifted amount and can carry the deduction to future years of the entire deduction reduces income tax liability to zero . Upon the passing of the grantor , any remaining funds in the trust are then given to the charitable organization .
I agree , the safest way to leave your child life insurance proceeds is to set up a trust with a trusted attorney . It should only cost a few hundred dollars , but you will have total piece of mind that your children will legally be taken care of in the event of your death . Not only should you consider how the proceeds should be allocated while the child is a minor but may be rationing the proceeds as a young adult . You can only imagine what an 18 or 19 year old would do with a lump sum check of $ 500,000 or more . Within a trust you can allocate funds at different ages or life events , such as a home purchase or marriage , so the money is not spent or `` blown '' on parties or sports cars . A legal trust is your best bet and change the beneficiary to this trust .
Yes . A trust can be very advantageous depending on the reason for the trust and the type of trust . For example , you can use a Funeral Trust as a way to pre-fund your funeral and protect your life insurance from Medicaid spend down . An experienced agent can look at your individual situation and help determine if a trust would benefit you .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is alegal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trustsreceive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy.The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Life Insurance What Does AD&D Mean ?
Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance Normally , AD&D is a rider attached to a life or health policy that gives benefits in case of death by accidental means or provides a set income in case of loss of certain body parts . AD&D riders are usually written so the insurer will pay double the payable amount in case of accidental death . These are sometimes known as double indemnity riders .
AD&D stands for Accidental Death and Dismemberment . While AD&D can be a rider that pays extra if the insured person dies from accidental death , some policies are stand alone AD&D policies . These AD&D policies that are not connected to a life insurance policy ONLY pay if the insured person dies from accidental death . I.e. they will not pay anything if death is due to illness or old age . So be very careful that you know what type of policy you are getting if you see AD&D in the description .
AD&D stands for Accidental Death and Dismemberment . While AD&D can be a rider that pays extra if the insured person dies from accidental death , some policies are stand alone AD&D policies . These AD&D policies that are not connected to a life insurance policy ONLY pay if the insured person dies from accidental death . I.e. they will not pay anything if death is due to illness or old age . So be very careful that you know what type of policy you are getting if you see AD&D in the description .
No , D & D is in addition to accidental insurance . The full name is AD&D , which stands for accidental death and dismemberment . Some life insurance policies allow you to add an AD&D rider , which pays extra if you die by accident . But a standalone AD&D policy only pays for death or dismemberment caused by an accident .
That is a great question ! I think that there are a lot of people who are confused about AD&D policies and life insurance . I think that often people assume that the AD&D policy is a cheaper form of life insurance , and therefore can `` save '' by purchasing one of them instead of the more expensive life policy . That is sadly not the truth . An AD&D policy will indeed pay if you pass away , but ONLY if your death falls within the very limited definition of `` Accidental '' as the insurer defines it . If you have a heart attack or stroke the policy wo n't pay - they are n't `` accidents '' . If you have a reaction to a spider bite , it 's not an `` accident '' . There are far fewer people who die from accidental causes than from natural causes , so the coverage offered in most cases is paid for , and uncollected . A life insurance policy will pay no matter what the cause , so is much more sure to pay . An AD&D policy is a cheap way to supplement your coverage , and is a good thing if you work in a hazardous job , but please do n't use it for primary coverage , okay ? Thanks for asking !
They are two different policies . An AD , D policy only covers accidental death and dismemberment . A life insurance policy will pay a death benefit regardless of the cause of death unless specifically excluded . Since ost people do not die as a result of an accident , AD&D policy premiums are far lower than life insurance premiums . An AD&D rider can be added to most life insurance policies .
I believe you 're referring to AD&D policies -LRB- accidental death and dismemberment -RRB- . Every life insurance policy covers accidental death . Traditional life insurance policies provide full coverage -LRB- paying out proceeds in the event death occurs by illness or injury -RRB- . Partial coverage policies only covering accidental deaths are known as Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- life insurance programs . These policies typically feature much lower premiums than full coverage programs , but only pay out a death benefit if death occurs under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. dying in a car accident -RRB- . If you only have an AD&D policy and you die due to a heart attack , the policy would not pay out any proceeds because that would be considered death due to illness . Even though the premiums are less with AD&D policies , it 's worth paying the premiums for a full coverage life insurance policy because individuals are most likely to die due to illness than they will by injury .
No , AD&D is not the same as Life Insurance . Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance only pays if death is cause by an accident , or if a limb is lost due to an accident . It will not pay if a person dies from illness or old age . Even if the accident is cause by illness -LRB- e.g. getting in a fatal car accident while having a heart attack -RRB- , an AD&D policy will generally not pay the death benefit . Life insurance pays for death cause by illness or by accident . Since most death occurs by natural causes , more death benefits are paid , and the policy has a higher premium than AD&D . But the chance of having a permanent Life Insurance policy pay out is nearly 100 % , where the chance of ever collecting on an ADD&D policy is very low .
Well , actually , they are both life insurance . Accidental death and dismemberment coverage will pay only when the cause of death is by accident . -LRB- The dismemberment clause means that money is payable if a certain number of limbs are disabled . -RRB- What you and I typically call life insurance is a policy that will pay a benefit whether the cause of death is accident or illness . Wouldnt it make sense that people buy life insurance and not AD&D ? After all , nobody knows how theyre going to die . True , but AD&D has a role to play . Sometimes , people are unfortunately not insurable for typical life insurance . They simply have too many serious uncontrolled medical conditions . So they should buy accident-only coverage . I mean , car accidents , plane crashes , falls off roofs , etc. can happen to anybody . But here things get tricky . What happens if somebody has a heart attack while their plane is tragically falling from the sky ? Dilemmas such as these are why medical examiners and forensic specialists earn their pay .
Life insurance can cover death in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- Full coverage 2 -RRB- AD&D Full coverage means that the life insurance policy will pay out a death benefit regardless of whether death occurs by illness -LRB- including old age & natural causes -RRB- or injury . This is the most common type of life insurance that is purchased because a person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are by an injury -LRB- e.g. car accident or a plane crash -RRB- . AD&D is short for Accidental Death & Dismemberment . This kind of life insurance , while typically cheaper than full coverage , only pays out a death benefit if death occurs due to injury -LRB- the types of injuries that are covered may be outlined in the plan as opposed to general language -RRB- . Given that the average person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are from injuries , full coverage is a much more desired option for people . If a person dies by illness and has an AD&D policy , this coverage will not pay out a death benefit . It 's important to consult with an experienced life insurance broker to compare your options and help you determine the type , amount , and length of coverage that will be most suitable to your needs and budget and which carrier can offer that coverage at the lowest rates . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Great question ! There are a couple of major differences . Perhaps most importantly is what they will pay out for . An AD&D policy will only pay if you pass due to an accidental death as defined by their definition of `` accident '' . A sickness , or other health issue -LRB- heart attack , stroke -RRB- will not be considered an accident , so there would not be a payout for a claim . A Life Insurance policy would pay out for both causes of death , accidental or health related . A benefit of the AD&D policies is that if you are disabled as a result of an accident you can file a claim and be compensated for the injury , something a Life insurance policy wo n't . Many Life insurance policies include an accident rider that increases the death benefit if the death is by a covered accident , and nearly all will offer it as a rider . I would not advise that someone purchase an AD&D policy as their sole form of protection , as the vast majority of deaths are health related , but they can add some nice extra protection . If you have any questions , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be glad to help . Thanks for asking !
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an experienced life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a term insurance policy may be more suitable to the need than a permanent policy . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Once you 've figured out how much coverage you want and how long you need it for , you then need to find the carrier 's program that is going to offer the coverage at the lowest possible cost . This is where the risk classification comes in . This is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for . You also want to make sure of the type of coverage you have - full coverage or Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- . With full coverage , the proceeds are paid out whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under an AD&D policy , the policy only pays out if you die by a specified circumstance -LRB- e.g. a car crash -RRB- - if you die by illness and you have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit . This is important because people see the price of an AD&D policy and it looks very attractive because it 's cheap . That 's because you 're more likely to die by illness than you are of an injury . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
AD&D -LRB- accidental death and dismemberment -RRB- can be a stand alone policy or a rider to a life insurance policy . Life insurance policies pay in the case of death , regardless of the cause . AD&D policies only pay if death -LRB- or dismemberment -RRB- is the result of an accident . AD&D plans have a place but should not be your only form of life insurance
Life insurance differs from AD&D in that Life Insurance pays for death by any reason , whereas AD&D only pays for death by accidental reasons . AD&D stands for Accidental Death and Dismemberment . If the death is due to falling down stairs , car accident , etc , the policy will pay the death benefit . And some policies also pay for the loss of an extremity . But if death was due to illness -LRB- even an accident caused by illness , such as driving into a tree while suffering a heart attack -RRB- , the policy will not pay . Life insurance covers both types of death : natural and accidental .
I am not familiar with `` D&D '' , could you mean `` AD&D '' ? That is an accidental death and dismemberment rider on life insurance policies . Those are stand alone polices as well . As a rider added to a traditional life policy it doubles the face amount benefit in case of accidental death and triples the face amount if death by a common carrier -LRB- plane , train , ferry -RRB- . It will also pay a scheduled percentage in case of loss of limb -LRB- arm , hand , leg , foot -RRB- or loss of hearing or sight . These are usually very inexpensive to add to a policy . Just remember accidental death is still covered as any other death on a traditional life insurance policy .
Life insurance pays from all causes of death , including suicide -LRB- after 2 years in Canada -RRB- . . The accidental death pays if the death results from an accident . With AD&D policies this can actual increase depending on the type of accidental death . It is usually quite inexpensive , but since it can not be counted on in every circumstance should not be counted on totally in any planning . The dismemberment portion as the name suggests pay for loss or loss of use of parts . For example loss of a limb due to an accident or loss of sight . The AD&D policy or rider will provide a schedule of what portion of the face amount will be paid for each occurrence . In Canada AD&D riders are often are seen with Disability and Automobile Insurance policies If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life insurance does cover the AD of AD&D , which is accidental death . It does not cover the final D , which is dismemberment , unless there are living benefits built into the policy , or perhaps by virtue of a critical illness or disability income rider . Life insurance without living benefits only pays out the face amount upon death , although money can be borrowed from the cash accumulation within Whole Life or Universal Life ,
Life insurance pays the proceeds upon loss of LIFE . The cause of death is irrelevant , except for a few conditions such as suicide during the first two years . AD&D insurance pays the proceeds for ACCIDENTAL DEATH & / or DISMEMBERMENT . Most death is caused by natural causes , which means that Life insurance policies pay out far more often then do AD&D policies .
A hybrid life insurance policy blends both non-medical and fully underwritten coverage . The idea is you get a portion of the death benefit being applied for as full coverage without an exam -LRB- the rest being AD&D coverage -RRB- and the rest turns into full coverage after an exam is completed and you 're approved . The initial process can be completed in just a few days -LRB- typically 48 hours or so -RRB- - when the exam is completed , it can take a few weeks for the underwriting to be wrapped up . Once the initial non-medical coverage is in force , you can then decide to take an exam to turn the rest of the coverage into full coverage -LRB- you generally have a window of about 6 months to complete the exam - can vary by carrier -RRB- . Even if you come up with poor numbers and are declined for the rest of the coverage being turned into full coverage , you can still keep the initial format of the plan because it 's already in force . It 's probably easier to envision with an example . If you apply for $ 250,000 of coverage with a 20-year term period under a hybrid life policy and you 're approved for the non-medical side -LRB- again , typically takes only a couple of days -RRB- , only a portion of the coverage will be full coverage . So let 's say the coverage is actually $ 100,000 of full coverage and $ 150,000 is AD&D -LRB- actual ratios will vary by carrier -RRB- . This means that if you died without completing the exam and getting the rest of the coverage approved , only $ 100,000 would be paid out instead of the full $ 250,000 . The only way the full $ 250,000 would be paid is if you died under accidental means -LRB- e.g. a car accident -RRB- . It sounds like a great idea on paper , right ? You 're getting coverage quickly and you 've got something locked in in case you ca n't qualify for the full coverage transition . There 's a huge issue with this type of program !!!! The RATE PER $ 1,000 of full coverage that you 're paying under a hybrid life policy can -LRB- and likely will be -RRB- A LOT higher than you would be paying for coverage under a traditional life policy - meaning you can end up spending a ton of extra money on premiums unnecessarily that could easily be in your own pocket . The chances of a claim for AD&D coverage is slim to none . You 're most likely to die from illness than you are to die from injury . *** You want to be paying the lowest cost per $ 1,000 of full coverage - this is the key point you want to look at when you 're buying your coverage . *** Think about it this way . If you 've got a $ 250,000 non-medical policy and a $ 250,000 hybrid policy , and the premium for the hybrid policy is less , you 're actually paying a much higher rate because only a portion of the face amount is full coverage , where as the entire face amount under the regular non-med policy is 100 % full coverage . But you can just take the exam and turn it into full coverage right ? Problem solved ? - NO !!! If you 're willing to take an exam in the first place , you may as well have just done a traditional fully underwritten program to start with , because the premiums for those programs are substantially less than they are for hybrid policies and you have full coverage from day 1 . The long and short of it is this - if you do n't want to take an exam , buy a non-medical policy . If you 're willing to take an exam to lower your premiums or secure a higher amount of coverage , apply for a fully underwritten program because you 're going to get much better rates . The idea with hybrid policies is to try to get the best of both worlds , but the process just does n't make much sense with how much you 're spending for full coverage . I hope this provides some clarification for you . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance Normally , AD&D is a rider attached to a life or health policy that gives benefits in case of death by accidental means or provides a set income in case of loss of certain body parts . AD&D riders are usually written so the insurer will pay double the payable amount in case of accidental death . These are sometimes known as double indemnity riders .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Cymbalta ?
Cymbalta is a prescription drug so it would not generally be covered under Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- - you can use the plan finder tool on the Medicare.gov website to see what prescription plans will cover the medication as well as enroll in a plan -LRB- if an available time to - e.g. having a special enrollment period or it 's the annual enrollment period -RRB- .
Cymbalta will have different costs with each Part D RX plan or the Rx plans built inherently into Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C plans -RRB- . Each plan has a formulary which tiers the drugs and then ties each tier to a copay . You will not find Cymbalta in a lower copay tier with most carriers as they will all have it listed as a tier 3 or tier 4 medication . There are some plans that have lower copays associated with tier 3 however . Most companies charge a $ 45 to $ 50 copay for a one month supply of a tier 3 drug . There are some plans that have a $ 18 to $ 25 copay for tier three which could save you some money . The last thing to keep in mind is regardless of the copay amount , a drug like Cymbalta is going to push you into the Part D coverage gap `` donut hole '' much faster than a lower cost generic would do .
Cymbalta , used to treat depression , may be a covered drug under your Medicare Part D plan . This brand name drug is reasonably expensive , over $ 260 for a 30 day supply . There are generic alternatives such as Venlafaxine . Often a drug plan will not cover a brand name drug if there is a generic alternative .
Cymbalta is a prescription drug so it would not generally be covered under Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- - you can use the plan finder tool on the Medicare.gov website to see what prescription plans will cover the medication as well as enroll in a plan -LRB- if an available time to - e.g. having a special enrollment period or it 's the annual enrollment period -RRB- .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not includeHPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not include HPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
Some things associated with vision are covered under Medicare and some are not . Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare . Even if you start out taking an routine eye exam and it is determined during the exam that you have eye conditions qualifying for Medicare funded treatment , only subsequent exams for those conditions will be covered . Medicare does cover glaucoma testing for those at risk for glaucoma due to certain conditions or family history . It will cover medically prescribed exams , testing , and treatments for eye conditions that result from illness or injury . Medicare does not cover eyeglasses . It will cover an IOL following a cataract surgery and eyeglass as a prosthesis during cataract surgery recovery .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicare does not cover a routine eye exam just to check to see if your prescription has changed -LRB- refraction exam -RRB- . Medicare does not cover new glasses unless you have been prescribed new glasses after cataract surgery . Medicare will cover anything medically wrong with your eyes such as cataracts , glaucoma , macular degenerative disease , etc. . Medicare does not cover dental unless your teeth have been injured as a result of an accident .
Medigap is a supplemental health insurance policy that can be purchased to go along with Medicare Part A and Part B . It is used to cover the costs that Medicare does not cover . Medigap does not fit in with Medicaid as Medicaid covers all medical costs and does not have the `` gaps '' of coverage that Medicare does .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Put My Elderly Parent On My Health Insurance ?
No . An elderly parent should be qualified for Medicare . With the affordable options available with Medicare Advantage it really does not make sense to put an older person on your health insurance . Even if you could the premium would be totally unaffordable for most people . A Medicare Advantage plan in most area 's will offer more extensive coverage at a fraction of the cost .
I am going to answer your question by giving you a true life story that I experienced with one of my elderly clients that hopefully helps you to see the `` complexity of life '' issues we all have to face . I have an elderly lady that has been a client for years , We have grown old together . She has saved money and has continued to work every day in spite of my objections . Her brother was in a nursing home and she went to see her brother without fail at least twice a week . The path she had to travel included one of these `` turn lanes '' that clears the traffic to turn left while the other lanes supposedly had the red light . One day she was making that left turn and a motorcycle hits her right hand side whell panel as she is turning . The motorcycle flies over her car and the driver is killed . The investigating officer ticketed my client for `` failing toyield right of way '' . Please remember my client has money . What if that `` family '' of that deceiased motorcycle driver sues my client for `` wrongful death '' ? I knw we all look for ways to save money but how often are `` penny wise and pound foolish ? '' .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
No . An elderly parent should be qualified for Medicare . With the affordable options available with Medicare Advantage it really does not make sense to put an older person on your health insurance . Even if you could the premium would be totally unaffordable for most people . A Medicare Advantage plan in most area 's will offer more extensive coverage at a fraction of the cost .
That is a great question ! Anyone who is not a legal minor in your State can own a policy . The owner can be the insured , or they might not be . A parent can be the owner of a policy insuring a minor child , for example . In some cases , the adult child might be the owner of a policy insuring their elderly parent . An owner is often the insured . All there has to be is an insurable interest . Thank you for asking !
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
To get Life Insurance for the elderly , you must first determine if the person to be insured meets the health guidelines . There are a number of small , No Exam policies that cover individuals up to age 80 or 85 , that make allowances for many of the health conditions that can plague the elderly . However , if there have been recent hospitalizations , if health conditions are very poorly controlled , or if there is need of assistance to do any ADL 's , the policy will be graded or could be declined.If cognitive abilities are reduced due to dementia or Alzheimer 's , the only option will be guaranteed issue coverage , and most of those policies are not offered past age 80 . By shopping with an agency that specializes in life insurance for seniors , you can obtain the best rate and find one that will work for the health factors of the elderly person in mind .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Medicare will only pay for medically necessary durable medical equipment prescribed by a doctor . Unless there is a very unusual circumstance , I do not see medicare approving a recliner . In most cases I would say the answer is no to your question . I took care of two elderly parents , both of whom need lift chairs . Medicare would not pay for them .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
Life insurance for the elderly is available . Rates are based on many factors , but mainly your health and age . So if you are elderly , naturally , the premium is going to be higher than a younger person would pay . There are many reputable carriers that offer moderately-priced plans for the elderly .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Yes , elderly people can get life insurance . If they have moderately good health , it is possible to purchase life insurance up to age 90 . For a small , final expense policy that does not require an exam , the oldest age at which that type of policy is offered -LRB- to my knowledge -RRB- is age 85 .
Yes , if you drive the car regularly then you want to get a Non-Owned auto policy . This is common for example if an elderly parent who does not drive owns the car but you use the car . Talk to a good local independent agent to find a competitive auto insurance plan that will meet your needs .
Yes , there is life insurance for the elderly . A number of No Exam , Final Expense policies can be purchased by persons up to age 80 , and a handful are available to applicants up to age 85 . There is quite a bit of leniency on the health questions for these policies , but it is possible to be declined . The maximum face amount offered is often $ 25,000 for this type of policy , although some come in higher face amounts . Persons up to age 90 can apply for life insurance that requires medical exam and records . These are harder to get but for an elderly person with relatively good health , it is possible to get this type of policy . Here , the minimum face amount is usually over $ 25,000 and the only maximum limit is what the applicant can afford .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Does Dave Ramsey Say About Long Term Care Insurance ?
In an article by Dave Ramsey published on Nov 13 , 2012 , for FOXBusiness , Dave answers the question , `` Is there a point where you can self-insure for long term care needs without a policy ? '' His advice is that , unless you have $ 20M in liquid assets and have $ 2M to $ 3M to set aside for long term care , go ahead and transfer that risk to a long term care insurance policy that you purchase by age 60 .
Dave promotes buying term life insurance , paying off your debt and investing the difference in mutual funds . Based on his disciplined middle class approach , he feels that you can self-insure for extended care later on in retirement . He has expressed his concerns on the price tag of long term care insurance and feels its generally not the best value proposition .
I love Dave Ramsey . I listen to him and have attended his financial peace university and let me tell you , great advise . I even have his book sitting on my desk as I type this . However I can not speak on behalf Dave Ramsey but if I recall correctly Dave would say do n't spend your money on a fancy car but instead build your wealth first . Dave 's saying is `` Live like no one else so later you can live like non one else '' . Also he would say carry high liability limits to protect your assets and the highest deductibles you can afford unless a higher deductible does not make a significant enough premium difference . I would recommend hisfinancialpeace series and book and then I would go ask Dave what he thinks about auto insurance .
What does Dave Ramsey think of Annuities ? Not really sure as I do n't follow Dave Ramsey that much . Dave is the current financial `` guru '' gracing the airwaves . There were many before Dave and there will be many after Dave . While Dave 's message about getting out of debt and staying out of debt is a fine one , similar to the one my mom told me many years ago , Dave does n't always understand financial products that well as honest advice on them might conflict with his message .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
I have read one of Dave Ramseys books but I am certainly not an expert . I think Dave Ramsey would say to have the amount of life insurance that you need in place when the need arises . A policy that has expired or is inadequate defeats the purpose of life insurance . While I realize that Dave Ramsey advocates term insurance , the key remains the same . Make sure you have enough when the need arises . If you investments reduce your risk and need for life insurance , that is fine but make sure that you have the risk covered . You are valuable and you love people who will be hurt terribly if you dont make it home today .
Dave Ramsey says to only consider variable annuties if you are totally debt free and have used all your tax-deferred options . Make sure you understand the fees , riders , options and surrender period associated with your annuity . Use these four mutual funds : 1 -RRB- growth , 2 -RRB- international , 3 -RRB- growth and income , and 4 -RRB- aggressive growth . Finally , Dave Ramsey says to never use annuities inside retirement options .
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
In an article by Dave Ramsey published on Nov 13 , 2012 , for FOXBusiness , Dave answers the question , `` Is there a point where you can self-insure for long term care needs without a policy ? '' His advice is that , unless you have $ 20M in liquid assets and have $ 2M to $ 3M to set aside for long term care , go ahead and transfer that risk to a long term care insurance policy that you purchase by age 60 .
Dave Ramsey recommends term insurance . He endorses a specific agency . He emphasizes adequate coverage which I consider essential in any type of financial planning . Not everyone will adapt their finances to Dave Ramseys model . For those who do not it would be wise to consult with a qualified agent and determine the best way to provide the protection that you need . It could be that the answer will be term insurance but for many it is other forms of life insurance . Each of us is unique and one program does not meet the needs of everyone . There is a subculture that lives near my agency that rarely purchases term life insurance .
Dave Ramsey does not think you should buy cancer insurance or any type of specific dread disease insurance . He confuses the purpose of it with major medical health insurance . Your major medical pays your doctor bills -LRB- minus your deductibles , co-pays and premiums . -RRB- Your cancer insurance pays a lump sum amount directly to you . You can use this while you are off work with cancer to pay for food , house payment , medical bills or anything else you need . Dave Ramsey is not a good resource for insurance information .
Dave Ramsey recommends having eight to ten times your income in term life insurance . There are a number of life insurance carriers that offer the term life insurance products that Dave Ramsey recommends , and those products can be purchased on many different websites on the internet ... the price is the same for the same product .
As a guest speaker at may Dave Ramsey classes , I 'm quite familiar with Dave 's perspective on term life versus whole life . Simply put , Dave is an advocate for getting the maximum amount of life insurance you can to protect the most valuable asset your family hasyour income . Term Life Insurance delivers the biggest `` bang for your buck '' when it comes to pure death benefit for the dollar you spend . There are many cash value benefits from a whole life policy . However , Dave 's guiding principles are to use the money that would go towards the whole life guarantees and cash value options of a whole life policy in a different form of investment . For many people , term life insurance is an appropriate solution .
Another good source to read -LRB- from Dave Ramsey -RRB- is this : WEBSITELINK . He goes in depth about the top four must-have insurance policies , along with why each is necessary . As Peggy said above , Dave Ramsey DOES suggest you get long term care insurance , and that you should start bygetting it from your work , if possible .
Yes , Dave Ramsey does recommend Disability Insurance . In fact he considers Long Term Disability Insurance a necessity for most full time workers . He recommends buying it through your work place if that is available . If not offered there , he says to try an association , and then buy privately if unable to get through an association . But buy it .
That is a great question ! Yes , Dave Ramsey does like term insurance . In Dave 's world , people actually save money , and keep enough on hand to be able to cover their burial expenses . They also are able to find tax-advantaged ways to transfer wealth to their loved ones . With 55 % of American Elder Citizens living in poverty , 66 % of our children living in poverty , and the majority of Americans living without any savings at all , I 'm not sure how well his world translates into the real one . Dave has a great program , and some solid financial advice , but if you can not save money , term will be the best choice for you only if you are too poor to afford any real coverage . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Dave Ramsey believes that there are 4 must have insurance policies and they are : 1 Life Insurance 2 . Long Term Disability Insurance 3 . Long Term Care Insurance 4 . Homeowners/Renters Insurance . Many people argue about the details of each as well as what company to choose . The bottom line is that there is no set answer for anyone - talk to your insurance agent and decide for you which is the best plan for you .
Great question . Dave Ramsey on his radio show that i listen to when I am in the car he like term life insurance . He like 20 year term life . That is good life insurance for the least cost . If you die in the term lets say year 19 you passed away the policy would pay your kids or wife the death amount .
That is a great question ! I did n't think she liked much of anything , except big piles of cash ! -LRB- I 'm joking , of course -RRB- My guess is that she likes it for the same reason that Dave Ramsey does - it 's cheaper than whole life , if you need to purchase life insurance at all . In their worlds , -LRB- think middle to upper middle class and higher -RRB- , you should purchase term life insurance , save or invest the difference of what your whole life would have cost , and hope that you die within the term period . Some people are able to do that , and so the financial guru 's smell like roses with their good advice . I hope that helps , -LRB- and no offense meant , Mr. Ramsey or Ms. Orman -RRB- , thanks for asking !
Dave Ramsey recommends a lot of things that many financial experts agree and disagree with . Ramsey believes in term insurance , which is an appropriate choice in many situations . But not all situations . The best resource for determining ho much coverage you need and what carriers are the best choice , is an experienced broker . No fees and no hassle . just the best information .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Theft Outside The Home ?
Renters insurance will cover a limited amount of theft from your car , such as contents of the vehicle . It will not cover theft of any equipment attached to the car . Renters works like homeowner coverage with smaller limits and more restrictions on what is actually covered . You are welcome to call me with any additional questions . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
In most homeowners policies there is an extension of protection to your property that is temporarily away from your residence . This coverage will be limited to around 10 % of the personal property limit . There is a slightly different situation if the personal property is moving to a new location .
It is important to talk to your insurance professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy , but generally speaking , theft is a named covered peril in most Home Insurance policies . This would include theft of your personal property from within your home of course , but also includes theft of your property outside of your home . Personal property outside of your home is usually covered up to 10 % of the total personal property amount listed in your policy . If covered , the loss settlement would be subject to your deductible . The claims specialist will also be looking for a copy or a police report .
-- > Normal 0 Renters -LRB- Tenant/Homeowners -RRB- Insurance policies will usually cover your personal property anywhere in the world . Of course , most tenant / homeowner policies also provide coverage on a named peril basis and theft is usually a specifically defined covered peril . So , in a general sense , renters policies should cover theft of your covered personal property while it is away from your home subject to the policys exclusions and limitations . Common limitations include : no coverage for theft from a dwelling under construction -LRB- often can be added -RRB- , theft from another residence you own or rent unless you are temporarily residing there , theft from the part of a residence you rent to someone , theft of boats , their equipment , trailers or campers , etc. .
Talk to your Insurance professional , but in most cases , modern Renters Insurance Policies do include theft as a covered peril , yes . Now , there may be policy limits included that you need to know about . In some cases , companies can settle covered theft losses on certain things , like camera equipment for example , based upon a stated `` inside limit '' listed on your policy 's declaration sheet . Further , your personal property may be covered outside your home -LRB- while on vacation or in your car as two examples -RRB- but only up to a stated maximum of 10 % of the total Personal Property coverage amount .
If you 're insured with a reputable company and a good agent , your renters policy should include theft . All a renters policy is is a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It 's there to cover your stuff and your liability . It 's rare , but there are companies that offer coverage that may not include theft . This coverage form is called `` Basic Form '' and it will not cover theft . Never , never , never accept a policy written on a basic form for your renters coverage . The most common form is Broad Form , and it will cover theft . Most companies and agents will use this when writing your renters policy . Do n't accept anything less .
Unfortunately , Geico does not carry Disability Insurance . Geico mainly carries property-casualty insurance , including home , condo , co-op , mobile home , flood , and renter 's insurance ; auto , commercial auto , collector car , motorcycle , ATV , boat , water craft , snowmobile , and umbrella insurance ; overseas and business insurance ; identity theft insurance ; and life insurance from an outside source .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance typically includes coverage for your actual home -LRB- the Dwelling Coverage -RRB- , coverage for separate structures -LRB- such as detached garage or shed -RRB- , coverage for your belongings -LRB- both the items inside your home , as well as items that may be outside of the home -RRB- , liability protection -LRB- coverage that protects you if you are sued -RRB- , and medical payment coverage -LRB- an amount thatcan paid to someone that is injured on your property -RRB- . These 5 items are usually included in any homeowners policy -LRB- renters and landlord policies have variations of these -RRB- . However , some insurance companies also include some extras at no additional cost . For instance , Farmers Insurance includes an extended coverage of 125 % of the dwelling coverage . This means that if the cost to rebuild the home exceeds the amount of dwelling coverage , Farmers Insurance will cover an extra 25 % over and above the dwelling coverage . Farmers Insurance also includes ID theft protection , and a few other extras .
Renters insurance does not cover vehicle theft . Vehicle theft would be covered under your auto insurance policy provided you carry comprehensive coverage on your auto policy . However , if you have a renters insurance policy and some of your personal items were in the vehicle that was stolen they may be covered by your renters policy as long as the items are personal items and not part of the vehicle .
Renters Insurance will cover your personal property up to the limits of your policy . For example if you have $ 50,000 in personal property coverage in the policy and all your clothes and furniture were destroyed in the fire then you would be able to claim that as a loss . Renters Insurance only covers your personal property and does not cover the structure . It will also cover for losses for theft . Lets say you had your lap top from home in your car and someone broke in your car and stole the computer then you could file that as a claim on your renters insurance policy . Some renters insurance also covers for Loss of Use and Personal Property off premises . This may not be available from ever insurance carrier .
The coverages provided are for both contents and liability . When the contents of your residence are affected as a result of the stated policy perils , renters insurance will provide coverage up to the amount of insurance purchased and specified in the policy , less any deductible . Some of the important perils that are covered are damage/loss to personal property from : fire & smoke ; windstorm or hail ; water damage ; burglary & theft ; vandalism . With regard to the liability coverage , it is obviously very important also . It provides coverage for injuries and accidents that happen both within your residence and outside that might result from alleged or actual negligence on your part . It does not replace auto insurance however .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Let me add one point . Theft and Mysterious disappearance are two separate things . So talk with your agent . Theft coverage will respond if there is evidence of a theft . For example a broken door lock or other evidence that someone gained access to your premises . The broader coverage available from some carriers can include mysterious disappearance which is basically that the insured item is not where you believed it to be and therefore has been possibly stolen or you simply do not understand how it disappeared . Mysterious disappearance is generally more expensive than theft , and is generally purchased in-connection with protecting valuable articles of jewelry , watches and furs or other property that have their own sub limits in a homeowners or renters policy . Read the policy relative to how jewelry , watches and fine arts are protected and if it does not sound like enough coverage talk to your agent .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Does Disability Insurance Pay For Maternity Leave ?
Groups short term disability insurance , or `` sick leave '' does usually pay for maternity leave . You need to obtain the coverage at least a year before becoming pregnant in order for the group policy to cover your time off before and after having your baby . Private Disability Insurance does not pay for maternity leave unless there are complications with the pregnancy or childbirth , upon which the long term disability coverage would kick in after the policy 's elimination period is met .
To answer your question requires us to consider the requirements under law for the family medical leave act . The FMLA imposes upon employers certain obligations to provide the employee unpaid leave from their job without fear of losing their job . Employees continue to enjoy employer provided medical benefits as if they are active at work . Maternity leave is an eligible medical event . Employees are entitled to up to twelve work weeks of leave in a 52 week year . Seek out more information by searching the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 for more information . Now , as to obtaining an `` extended , paid maternity leave from your job '' , you seem to be asking on whether there is a way to buy an extended period of benefit for a group , employer sponsored medical or disability income program . I have not encountered this option as a benefit in 38 years of work in this industry but , the best option is to contact the benefits administrator or Human Resources at your employer with this question . No optional benefit available will waive the rights or duties of the employer under common policy and practice , nor under the FLMA of 1993 . There are indemnification type health insurance policies that may provide some cash benefit , and you can buy disability insurance prior to the pregancy that can cover medical as a disability , but they wo n't impact the employer benefits nor their right to expect you to return to work when their maternity leave expires . The indemnity policies and disability insurance will have specific underwriting requirements and being currently pregnant is likely to be a condition that prohibits a benefit until the pregnancy runs its course .
Disability Insurance may cover maternity leave if it is provided as a Group Short Term Disability plan and if the insured has met the criteria for qualifying for a claim related to maternity and childbirth . Private Short Term Disability does not cover maternity leave , nor does Long Term Disability Insurance , whether purchased privately or provided in a group plan . However , complications of pregnancy and childbirth are usually covered .
Groups short term disability insurance , or `` sick leave '' does usually pay for maternity leave . You need to obtain the coverage at least a year before becoming pregnant in order for the group policy to cover your time off before and after having your baby . Private Disability Insurance does not pay for maternity leave unless there are complications with the pregnancy or childbirth , upon which the long term disability coverage would kick in after the policy 's elimination period is met .
Individual disability policies do not offer maternity leave benefits . However , some group disability insurance policies may provide maternity benefits - not all do though -LRB- be sure to note that -RRB- . If you have a group disability policy , be sure to check the benefits under your policy - especially the definition of disability -LRB- many group DI policies feature a `` gainful occupation '' definition -RRB- - certain conditions likely will need to be met for a maternity leave benefit claim to be approved . If you 're looking for individual disability insurance or to set up a group disability policy , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group with a strong disability insurance background . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Short Term Disability Insurance offered by an employer can cover maternity leave . There is a normally a requirement that you need to have worked for that employer some time before becoming pregnant in order to be eligible for this benefit . Private Short Term Disability Insurance , unfortunately , does not cover maternity leave . Long Term Disability , both group and private , will cover disabling complications of pregnancy or delivery .
Short Term Disability Insurance offered through a group policy does usually cover maternity leave . Private short term disability insurance policies , unfortunately , do not usually cover maternity leave . Both types do usually cover complications due to pregnancy , childbirth , or recovery from childbirth , although those benefits may be provided through long term disability coverage .
Group Short Term Disability policies will usually pay for maternity leave . There is normally a waiting period of about 12 months so that the pregnancy is not a `` pre-existing condition '' . Unfortunately , private Short Term Disability policies not pay for maternity leave unless there are complications with the delivery or recovery .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
You can use Group Short Term Disability Insurance for maternity leave . This is only available though employers who offer it . Some states mandate that employers offer Group Short Term Disability , but most do not mandate it . Unfortunately , private Short Term Disability can only be used for complications of pregnancy . Long Term Disability does pick up when complications cause loss of work beyond the policy 's elimination period .
Yes , short term disability insurance does cover maternity leave if purchased at the right time -LRB- meaning , before you become pregnant -RRB- and with a policy that states that it has that benefit . Unlike long term disability insurance , which only covers complications of pregnancy , short term disability insurance covers time off related to normal pregnancy and childbirth .
Alot of times , unless you have a supplemental policy through Aflac -LRB- they are one of the only companies i know of that has a plan that will pay you for maternity -RRB- you are going to be coming out of pocket . Also depending on your situation , your job may pay you for your costs when on maternity leave
Maternity leave is the time taken off of work to delivery your baby and care for your newborn during it 's first weeks of life . Short Term Disability insurance is the type of coverage that covers that time off by paying the new mother part of your regular wages . It is also called `` sick leave '' by some businesses .
You can get disability insurance , however it will NOT cover time away from work due to the pregnancy , unless you geta medical professional to sign off on a complication of such a nature as to merit time off . Regular pregnancy = potential chance at maternity leave should your employer offer it , but it does not automatically set you up to collect disability insurance checks .
Short term disability insurance is used to cover illnesses and injuries that typically last under a year , or up to two years . Surgeries , chemo treatments , maternity leave , broken bones and sprains , and back injuries are some common ailments covered by short term disability insurance . The policy pays income to the disabled person until they can go back to work .
Not all policies are created equal . Some short term disability policies will pay for your recovery for normal childbirth , and others wo n't . Most will cover lost income due to complications of pregnancy prior to delivery , or any postpartum disorders that delay your return to work . Policies sold directly to individuals do not cover normal childbirth . Only policies sold through groups do so . You can purchase individual coverage through a payroll deduction and pay the premium 100 % yourself . If your employer does not offer a voluntary option , you can ask them to make one available . Or you can purchase a policy direct , but it wo n't cover your maternity leave .
Health insurance is designed to make benefit payments to medical providers . It does not replace income . Short term disability replaces income . You would need to have a policy in force prior to conception to qualify for maternity leave benefits . If you are eligible for FMLA protections , your employer must continue your health insurance benefits on the same basis as if you were working . You would have to continue making premium payments , or risk losing coverage .
There are two categories of people who should have short term disability insurance . The first group is people who live check-to-check with little or no savings . A short disruption in income could cause them to quickly fall behind on the mortgage , car payments , and other regular bills . The second group is people who have a high probability of becoming temporarily disabled . People with active lifestyles or physically demanding occupations may need a policy . Women who are planning to have children will need to stop working while on maternity leave .
Another way to think about this question is , `` How much woulda disabling event cost you without coverage ? '' Considering Brandon 's well-thought out response to you , also thinking about the question from the darker side makes many of us uneasy inside though . -LSB- I do n't like to think something like that can happen , but it does . -RSB- From personal experience , I can tell you that disability insurance and critical illness insurance has a very real place in anyone 's planning who has a paycheck and depends on that paycheck for their living . Period . I am now 42 years old and at the age of 27 I delivered a very healthy baby girl - went home from the hospital after 4 days like normaland on the 5th day had a pulmonary embolism that locked up both of my lungs almost to the point of death . So instead of being gone from my job for 8 weeks on maternity leave , I was gone for almost 5 months . Without my DI and CI policies , it would have been a financially crippling event for my family . It was not expected - but it unfortunately happened . Brandon shared some very realistic numbers here for consideration . I applaud anyone looking into these ancillary policies to protect their planning . Sheryl Brown / @AshBrokerage
Many health insurance plans cover maternity . Aetna and Blue Cross are two major carriers that offer maternity coverage on many of their plans . If you can wait until 2014 , just about all plans will be mandated -LRB- required -RRB- to include maternity benefits . It will increase the cost of policies , but getting pregnant wo n't cause alarm bells to go off with your health insurance any more . Open Enrollment begins in October for 2014 plans and a federal tax subsidy will be available for many Americans . An experienced broker will find and compare the best maternity coverage for you , and simplify the application process .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does My Life Insurance Policy Have Cash Value ?
There are two types of life insurance fundamentally , term life insurance and permanent life insurance . Term insurance has no cash value with an exception of a return of premium rider at the end of the term . Permanent life insurance comes with different names . the most popular are whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . These all have a cash value component . Open your policy to the declaration page . This page will tell you the type of policy you have . If you find it is a permanent plan mentioned above , then turn over to the illustrations page . These pages will give you the cash value of at each policy year with the cash value of your plan .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Whole life insurance is life insurance that includes a cash value build up in the policy that reduces the financial obligation to the company . In other words , the client is self-funding the death benefit by a portion of the premium going to the cash value . As the cash value grows the less the company has to contribute to the face amount of the policy . The difference between the face amount of the policy and the cash values is the actual amount that the company pays upon the death of the policy holder . For a cash value policy to be paid-up the cash value build up has to reach a point where it equals the face amount of the policy . This increased funding of the cash value is why paid-up policies are much more expensive than standard whole life policies . As a financial professional , I only recommend term insurance to my clients that gives them 2-3 times the protection needed while building assets through debt reduction and investments in 401ks , IRAs and mutual funds . Keeping your investments separate from your insurance is the financially sound thing to do . If you have any questions please contact me @ 843-450-9879 or visit my website @ www.hinchfinancialgroup.com .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Your Life Insurance policy will have the specifics of the `` Grace Period '' that provides and cushion for you when you miss a payment . Life Insurance companies usually want youto keep you policy . Their Grace Period is usually 30 to 60 days depending on the policy and the company . The type of policy will make a difference as well . A Term Life Insurance policy does not have any `` Cash Value '' or a side account that can grow at an interest rate like a savings account and cover the missed premium . This `` Cash Value '' is a feature of a Universal Life policy . The Term Life policy would be in danger of lapsing much quicker and you are probably going to cancelled quicker . A Universal Life policy with cash value is going to use the saving portion to pay the premium . The Universal Life will lapse once the cash value is depleted and the grace period expires . You can call your agent or Life Insurance company and work out options on the Universal Life policy such as lower the `` Face Amount '' or amount of death benefit to help you make the policy last longer . `` Whole Life Insurance '' will have a grace period as well . Coverage options beyond the grace period become more complicated . This Whole Life policy also has a `` Cash Value '' or savings portion as well . You will be subject to the policy 's `` Non Forfeiture Options '' within the policy . These options are different for each policy . You will have to check your policy . Usually , there are 3 options : Return of the cash value to you minus any loans you took out , you can change to a lower amount of insurance that is `` Paid Up '' or you do not have to pay premiums for the amount of death benefit , or you can change to a `` Term Life Insurance '' policy for a specific period of time then the insurance stops .
Life insurance is one of the investments that allows an individual to trade a low monthly ; payment for a life insurance policy that has a protection amount that is much higher than my monthly payment . If my monthly payment is $ 100 month and I have a policy of $ 500,000 do you consider that money well spent . The Life Insurance policy can aslo enable tax managment strategies if it is a `` cash value '' policy '' . The `` cash value '' builds and as long as I do not withdraw the earnings it is not taxable . So if I have had this policy for 18 years and my `` baby '' is now grown and driving my Subaru and needs money to go to college I can pull the cash value at intervals that allows me to minimize my consequences and my `` baby '' slides off to college . Is that a good `` investment vehicle '' ? Life Insurance also enables Estate Planning strategies enabling me to pass assets to my children without huge tax consequences .
The cash value is the portion of whole life insurance that has built up so far in your cash account . Think of it like money in the bank . The way whole-life is designed , it has a level premium for the length of the policy or until it is paid off . What 's really happening is as the cash account grows , the actual insured amount reduces by the same amount . You become more and more self-insured each year . If you buy $ 100,000 whole-life policy , in the begining your insured amount is $ 100,000 and your cash value is zero . Many years later your cash value is $ 40,000 and the insured amount is $ 60,000 for a total death benefit of $ 100,000 . Several more years later your cash value is $ 90,000 and the Insured amount is $ 10,000 for a death benefit of $ 100,000 If you live to age that the policy endows -LRB- usually age 95 or 100 on older policies and age 121 on newer ones -RRB- the cash value is $ 100,000 and the insured amount is zero . You are now self insured . You can use the cash value while you are living by taking policy loans which are actually loans against the cash build up in your policy not actually withdrawals from the policy or you can cash surrender the policy and walk away with the cash . If you have a participating policy that pays dividends , you can have additional cash value and death benefit build up from that .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Yes , cash value life insurance can work as an investment . That said , comparing the returns of the stock market to a life insurance policy is sort of a fools errand . Why ? RISK . Risk is the thing that keeps people up at night , worried about their investments panning out or not . When you consider cash value life as part of your financial plan , you are choosing a conservative , low return , very low risk choice . This may free you up to be more aggressive in other investment options as your cash values become a fall back or `` if I screw up elsewhere , I 've still got this '' investment . Will cash values provide stock market returns while maintaining the relative safety ? Nope . Stock Market returns require taking Stock Market risks . The up and down of a portfolio . Cash Value life will in most cases continue to move upward over time slowly moving upward . While that does n't sound exciting , a few years back when the market slapped everybody back ten years , my cash values continued to grow as they do n't go backwards . Something to think about as you plan for your life . Cash value plans provide if you do n't come home and they provide if you do come home .
Unfortunately , you can not borrow from a term life insurance policy because term life insurance does not have any cash value from which to borrow . Cash value is only present in permanent policies -LRB- Whole Life , Universal Life , and their variations -RRB- . Not all permanent policies have enough cash value to tap into until they have been in effect for some time , and some -LRB- e.g. guaranteed universal life -RRB- may never have much cash value . If you want a policy with cash value that you can borrow from in the future , most permanent policies will have an illustration that you can review before you purchase it , so you can see who much cash value will be available .
There are several reasons . With cash value life insurance such as whole life , you do not have to worry about prmiums going up as you get older and most likely to need the insurance . The cash value can help provide a buffer if your financial situation changes . Every whole life policy as nonforfiture options in the contract . The cash value can help conserve a poliy utilizing thes options . If you can not afford the premiums any longer the cash value can be used to buy a reduced paid up policy according to a schedule in your policy . You can also stop making payments and the policy will continue in-force with the cash value buying extended term insurance until the cash value is used up . You can cash surrender the policy and get some equity . When you deduct the cash value of a policy from the total premiums you pay you will see that in the long run cash value insurance was far less expensive than buing term . You can also take a loan on your cash value that is very interest friendly and will have no repayment schedule , although it is always best to at least pay the interest since the amount of the loan would be deducted from the face amount when you die .
Life insurance that has a cash value can be cashed in . When it is cashed in , the policy ends . There are some other options , such as borrowing from the cash value , that could be considered if you want to keep your policy in effect . Term life insurance does not have a cash value , and some permanent policies do not have more than a negligible cash value for years , or never generate much cash value . Those type of policies could be stopped , but could not be technically cashed in because there would be no cash to collect .
As David stated , only the owner of the policy can cash in a life insurance policy . It may need to be explained , as well , that not all life insurance polices can be cashed in , because not all life insurance policies have cash value . Even Whole and Universal Life policies usually take time to build up cash value , and Term policies never have cash value unless they have a return of premium feature . So , stated another way , only those who own policies that have cash value , can cash in their life insurance . But they can also borrow from their cash value , and that often is a better way to access the cash in the policy , so as not to give up the death benefit .
There are two main types of life insurance . The first is term life insurance which has no cash value . Think of it as renting . The second type of life insurance is cash value life insurance . The most popular go by names like , whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . All of which have cash value that builds with time . If you have one of these types of plans , look for the pages marked `` illustrations '' . You will find a cash value column explaining how much cash is built up in a given year . Most policies allow you to take a `` cash loan '' against them and keep your coverage in force . You may also cash out completely or roll the cash value to another plan . You will find the average policy will not have cash value until coverage has been in force for about 5 years .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does A Condo Need Homeowners Insurance ?
There are policies specifically designed for condo 's . Most condominium associations require insurance and if there is a mortgage your bank will . The major difference is that the condo policy will only cover personal belongings and the interior of the building not covered by the association . The association generally covers the building itself .
A condominium requires a special form of homeowners insurance . The title company will require evidence of insurance from the condominium association and from the individual borrowing money for the condo . The structure is the responsibility of the association and the interior is the responsibility of the condo owner .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
There isnt such a thing as a condo-renters policy . If you own the condo , then you need the condo form of a homeowners policy . If you are renting a unit regardless of how the title to the unit is held , you need a tenants policy -LRB- commonly called a renters policy . -RRB- The Condo form is for the owner of the unit and has similar coverages to as standard homeowners policy except that there isnt coverage for the building . The building is covered by a condominium master policy . The tenants policy covers the possessions of the renter . That form is the same regardless of whether it is a condo or an apartment .
Primary difference between Renters Insurance and Condo Insurance is in the ownership of the property . Both policies cover Personal Property , Loss of Use , Medical Payments to Others , and Personal Liability . And both policies allow for additional riders to be attached for specific items such as high value jewelry , gun collections , artwork , and etc. . Where the Condo Insurance is different is in the amount of insurance that can be added to cover Building Property . When you own a Condo , you own everything from the sheetrock in , and the condominium association manages everything from the sheetrock out . So items such as installed dishwashers , ovens , furnaces , and even toilets and showers fall under property owned by the condo owner . Typically renters do not own any of these items , and there is no need or reason to carry insurance for them . Condo policies may also have broader coverage for Additional Coverage areas , such as for Emergency Repair ; Trees , Shrubs , Plants and Lawns , and Separate Structures coverage.When you own a condo , it is important to know and understand what the General Insurance policy the Association holds covers , and how the common areas are classified . For example , what would happen if the association was forced to submit a large assessment on all of the condo owners ? Does the General Policy for the Association cover these instances ? If not , you 'll want a Condo policy that does have this coverage . As always , it is best to speak with a licensed , professional insurance agent who can help you interpret the policy coverage , identify gaps in coverage , and make sure you have protection for everything you might require .
You might need it if required , but its still a good idea to get it even if not required . When would you be required to get condo insurance ? Sometimes the condo association/HOA requires you to get it when buying the condo . If you had the condo for a while , you will find that you might be required to get it now that you are refinancing your loan through a mortgage company since mortgage guidelines have changed -LRB- which I see a lot -RRB- . Its still a good idea to get it because it provides coverage for your personal items and for the internal items of your property that you improve -LRB- known as betterments . -RRB- It basically fills in the holes and supplements the policy the condo association has on the entire building . Talk to your agent because there are a lot of important reasons to have condo insurance , such as for loss assessment -LRB- commonly found with condos and townhomes -RRB- , losses caused by a neighbor that does NOT have insurance , or losses happening because of your own doing . The insurance only costs $ 100 - $ 400 per year depending on what you need . Protect your investment and get the coverage , even if it isnt required .
There is a special form of homeowners insurance for condo owners . Most mortgage companies require that you have a condo form policy to protect their interests in the property . Unlike a standard Homeowners policy , the condo form does not cover exterior walls and the grounds as these are covered by an association policy .
More than likely not . I am not sure which type of association you are referring to : condo versus homeowners . If it is a condo association , then part of your association fees will go towards the master policy . The master policy covers the building from the walls out and common areas . It is rare that association fees will go towards an individual unit condo policy -LRB- HO-6 -RRB- . If it is a homeowners association , then the fees go towards the board , common area maintenance and insurance for the common areas . All home owners are required to purchase their own homeowners policy -LRB- HO-3 -RRB- . I hope this helps .
Condo Insurance can be tricky since often an HOA is involved . What first needs to be determined is what does the HOA actually cover . Does the HOA cover any part of the building . If so then we as agents determine what is already covered and look to fill the gaps . I can tell you that the HOA does not cover your personal liability , loss of use , guest medical and personal property so these coverage 's are needed at the very least . You will want to consult with a local independent agent to help you determine coverage 's needed for your condo policy .
No . Homeowners insurance is not covered in your condo association fees . Your condo association fees will likely include coverage for common areas and for insurance to replace damage to your unit , not including upgrades or personal property inside your unit . You will need to secure coverage for additions & betterment -LRB- s -RRB- -LRB- otherwise known as upgrades -RRB- to your unit and for personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- , loss of use coverage and Personal Liability . Be sure to check with your local independent insurance agent and your condo association . Hope this answer helps .
Condo Insurance falls under the `` Homeowners '' Category . You would want a type of policy mostly referred to as an HO6 . It provides protection from the walls in , protection for your contents , and liability coverage . Chances are your mortgage company and even your condo association require this type of policy . Living in this type of community you will want to inquire about your loss assessment coverage , you will definitely want more than the standard coverage , and your condo association may have requirements pertaining to the amount of loss assessment you need on your policy . Contact an independent agent in your state that can advise you further .
Let me add a couple important points to what has been said . The homeowners policy and therefore the condo policy has important liability coverage . Make sure you have sufficient coverage for liability as your exposure is often greater than someone who insures a single family residence . And lastly you do not find many free standing homes with sprinklers as most of the 126 million homes in the US were built before sprinklers became possible in dwelling construction , but many condos . because of size and structure do have sprinkles and many insurance companies give a discount to those policies . Be sure to mention to your agent that your condo building is sprinklered if in fact it is .
The cost of your condo insurance policy is going to depend on many factors . Some of these factors are the age of the condo building , the amount of coverage that you desire , the deductible level that you take , the total number of units within the building , the condo buildings distance from the nearest responding fire department , the condo buildings distance from the nearest fire hydrant , and many other factors . Contact a local agent to discuss the coverage and pricing available in your area .
A condominium requires a special form of homeowners insurance . The title company will require evidence of insurance from the condominium association and from the individual borrowing money for the condo . The structure is the responsibility of the association and the interior is the responsibility of the condo owner .
No , Condo Owner 's Insurance is not included in your fees . Generally -LRB- refer to your master association document -RRB- the Association would insure from the wall studs out -LRB- siding , insulation , roof -RRB- and will carry liability to cover the association . You need to insure from the wall studs in . That includes sheetrock , trim , cabinets , carpet , personal property and your own liability risk . Condo insurance is not very expensive since most claims happen on the outside of the building -LRB- wind and hail -RRB- . A specific area to look at is weather or not your heating and cooling equipment is covered by the assocation , or if you need to insure it .
Am I correct in assuming that your use of ` who ' in your question refers to the insurance carrier ? If you purchased the coverage and did not receive evidence of the coverage , binder , or a policy , contact the source of the insurance -LRB- if you know the agent or broker -RRB- and ask for a policy . The declarations page -LRB- s -RRB- should set forth the name of the insurance carrier , the name of the insured -LRB- s -RRB- , and the particulars of the contract . If you did not purchase the coverage , some entity -LRB- like a lender/mortgage holder , homeowners association , Co-op , or Condo association , etc. with an insurable interest -RRB- may have purchased the policy . You can contact this entity and pose your question . In most states a homeowners policy must be in the name of the owner -LRB- showing insurable interest -RRB- and the home must be occupied by the owner -LRB- eligibility requirement for most homeowners policies . -RRB- More details of your situation are needed to provide a more specific answer .
Great Question . Condo Insurance covers you for liability if some one falls in your condo . Also cover you for fire , theft and water damage . You would alos need to have coverage for the inside of your unit for the wall in case of a fire and your unit was damaged . Good Luck
in a word , no it does n't . You will find that typically any form of residential property policy , be it Renters , Condo Unit Owners or Homeowners ' , excludes coverage for motor vehicles . Coverage for your car is available only by purchasing an auto insurance policy . In order to have protection for your car you will need to have your Insurance Professional include physical damage coverage , namely both Comprehensive and Collision .
A renters policy is cheaper for the same amount of coverage on personal property . A homeowners covers not only the personal property but the residence itself . That is why it is more expensive . For your information a Condo policy is a combination of a homeowners and tenants because they are not responsible for the grounds and outer walls of the building .
Homeowner insurance works much in the same way as it does a home . The condo policy covers all furniture fixtures and walls below the roof and within the exterior walls . The only primary difference is the percentage of ownership of the roof , outside walls , separate structures . There is special insurance for a condominium . Keith Prim - Dallas - 214-435-0791
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Allstate Homeowners Insurance Cover Pitbulls ?
I would suggest speaking with your Allstate agent directly for a more detailed answer . However , Pit Bulls/Staffordshire Terriers are on the excluded dog list for all of my home insurance carriers . This excluded dog list generally includes breeds such as Pit Bulls & Staffordshire Terriers , Doberman Pinschers , Rottweilers , German Shepherds , Chows , Great Danes , Presa Canarios , Akitas , Alaskan Malamutes , Siberian Huskies and Wolf-hybrids
Great question . While pitbulls are great dogs for the most part insurance companies tend not to like to insure them . You will have a very hard time to get to cover you dog in your home insurance policy . Most insurance companies have a list of dogs they will not insure and pitbulls are on almost all of them .
Pitbulls are an excluded breed under many homeowners and renters policies . There are companies out there though that will had dog liability as a separate policy as long as you and the dog meet the carrier 's expectations for coverage . Contact a local agent to find out more about coverage availability and pricing within your geographic location .
That is going to depend on the insurance carrier . Each carrier maintains it 's own list of animals that it considers to be higher risk . Some of the dog breeds that tend to be on many of the lists are : pitbulls , german shepards , anddobermans to name just a few . Contact your local agent to discuss the effect that certain dog breeds mayhave on your homeowners insurance coverage and pricing .
Yes it does . You have liability coverage on your Renter 's policy . It usually comes with $ 100,000 of coverge which would cover a dogbite . This is why the agent will ask you if you own adog and what kind . Many companies will not insure you if you own certain breeds such as Pitbulls or Rottweilers .
It is possible that pitbulls may be an excluded breed under the terms and conditions of your policy . The best way to determine that , of course , is to check with your insrance professional . Some companies who limit breeds may also allow them provided that you can show proof of the dog successfully compleeting a comprehensive training program .
It depends on the State you live in . Allstate does offer homeowners insurance in most states . They have chosen not to offer homeowners in States where the losses have been too great to sustain . This is true with many companies . Allstate has Auto , Home , and Life insurance . While Allstate is a very good company , it always pays to shop around with your local independent agent before applying to make sure you are getting the best rate .
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
Allstate does offer life insurance through Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Company , American Heritage Life Insurance Company , and Allstate Life Insurance Company of New York . They offer both Term and Permanent life insurance products . To obtain a quote you can go to an agency or website selling life insurance through one of the Allstate companies . When using a quote engine , you will be able to compare their rates against the rates of other carriers .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
Allstate does offer life insurance through their subsidiaries : Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Insurance Company and American Heritage Life Insurance Company . To compare quotes from Life Insurance offered by Allstate with other life insurance quotes , you can visit a website with a quote engine that includes Lincoln Benefit Life .
Yes . Allstate offers multiple lines of insurance . Home , auto , business and life . If you are interested in getting Allstate insurance you should also consider bundling another product with it . The reason I say this is you can get a multi-line discount through Allstate that is pretty good . I am not an Allstate agent , but I have faced some serious competition from them due to the multi-line discount they offer . HOWEVER , I still must recommend contacting an independent agent to shop around for you . There are usually some regional carriers that can offer better prices with better coverage .
Yes . They own Lincoln Benefit Life . The company offers life insurance and annuities through Allstate agents and well as independent life insurance agents -LRB- brokers -RRB- . They are a well respected company with competitive products . While independent agents can offer life insurance products from many companies , Allstate agents will be limited to life insurance and annuities issued by their subsidiaries : Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Insurance Company and American Heritage Life Insurance Company .
Allstate has life insurance . They really do . Rates are somewhat competitive compared to other major insurers . Allstate is better known for their auto and home insurance prices were are usually competitive in most areas . For an Allstate quote on life insurance , or other carriers with lower rates , a full-time experienced broker can help the best .
Not knowing where you live all I can refer to you are the common companies which Provide Homeowners Insurance on top of the other available insurances : State Farm Insurance American Family Insurance Allstate Progressive Insurance USAA AMICA Insurance Liberty Mutual Nationwide Homeowners Insurance Keep in mind there are independent insurance agencies who work with several other companies to consider as well . Check where you have your auto insurance as you may be able to get a discount putting your auto and homeowners together .
Most reputable companies offer renters insurance and it 's very reasonably priced . Call your agent who handles your auto insurance and they should be able to help you . And , if they use the same company for your renters , you should get discounts off of both saving you quite a bit of money . Here are some things to consider : Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- , and your liability . Two things to get right : Use a tool to estimate what it would cost to replace your stuff . Notice I said `` replace '' . You can get insurance that would pay you the depreciated value of your stuff but , in my opinion , it 's worth a little bit more to get your stuff replaced with new . Your agent should have a tool to help you or you can use the one on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like the tool -RRB- . Pick a liability limit that will cover all your assets . I usually wo n't go below $ 300,000 and I usually recommend at least $ 500,000 . The price difference is usually below $ 10/yr . It 's well worth it . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust to do the best for you and take their advice . In the long run , you 'll be happy you did .
Allstate does not underwrite and issue health insurance under their own brand . It is quite possible in your state that they have a marketing arrangement with a health insurance carrier that will actually underwrite , issue , collect premiums and pay claims . Your Allstate agent may or may not be well versed in health insurance options . You should always consider using an independent agent that specializes in health insurance plans .
Great question . Allstate home insurance policy will cover fire , lighting , wind damage , Personal Liability as well . Allstate is like most insurance companies on home owners very similar . I would call your local broker and have them shop around for the best rate and best price on your home insurance . Good Luck
The largest auto insurance insurer is State Farm , who reported 8.7 billion in premium last year . Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- GEICO -RRB- recently passed Allstate to become the second largest insurer . GEICO reported 4.8 billion , Allstate 4.6 . 4th is Progressive at 3.9 billion . Rounding out the top 5 is Liberty Mutual , who recently barely passed Farmers , both being at 2.5 billion .
Yes , Allstate does sell life insurance through its affiliate companies of Allstate Life Insurance Company -LRB- Northbrook , Illinois -RRB- , Lincoln Benefit Life Company -LRB- Lincoln , Nebraska -RRB- , American Heritage Life Insurance Company -LRB- Jacksonville , Florida -RRB- , and Allstate Life Insurance Company of New York -LRB- Haupphage , New York -RRB- . Allstate offers Term Life , Universal Life , Variable Universal Life , and Whole Life insurance .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Do You Need Health Insurance To Get An Abortion ?
This is an interesting question . There are so many often bitterly expressed opinions on whether there should even be abortions . The answer to your question is no , you do n't need it ; in fact , you 'd be hard pressed these days to find an insurer who would cover it . I know that if you are in a position to consider having one , that there is a lot of emotional stress and turmoil for you to bear . Please speak with your pastor , priest , counselor , the other parent , someone that you trust and really think through your options before acting . Your choice will affect more lives than just your own , and will for the rest of your lives . If I can help in any way , please feel free to contact me . Good luck , and thanks for asking .
Cigna health insurance does not cover an abortion . Cigna offers many different types of coverage , including individual and family , small-business , self-employed , student and short-term plans . But like most carriers , elective abortions are not covered.In the event of a medical emergency , it is possible that benefits may be different . Reviewing your policy with an experienced broker will help you if that applies to you . We 'll help you find suitable coverage by shopping all of the available plans in your area .
Possibly , but not likely . While most health insurance plans cover birth control pills , the `` morning after '' pill is not designed to PREVENT pregnancy , but rather to end a pregnancy in the early stages . Ingestion of the morning after pill can lead to spontaneous abortion . Since it is not technically a preventive medication , good chance your health insurance carrier will deny coverage for the morning after pill .
This is an interesting question . There are so many often bitterly expressed opinions on whether there should even be abortions . The answer to your question is no , you do n't need it ; in fact , you 'd be hard pressed these days to find an insurer who would cover it . I know that if you are in a position to consider having one , that there is a lot of emotional stress and turmoil for you to bear . Please speak with your pastor , priest , counselor , the other parent , someone that you trust and really think through your options before acting . Your choice will affect more lives than just your own , and will for the rest of your lives . If I can help in any way , please feel free to contact me . Good luck , and thanks for asking .
Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- are good plans if you are in good health and not using a lot of medical services . In Alabama where I practice MA Plans have high out of pocket cost for people with serious or chronic health problems , as much as $ 6700 in a calendar year . The problem I see with MA Plans is that people start out using them when they are in good health but once your health changes and you have to use your MA Plan more and more you become unhappy with your out of pocket cost for Medicare covered services . If you become unhappy with your MA Plan and want to switch to a Medicare Supplement you may not be able to if you have serious health problems or you may pay a much higher premium because of your health . My professional recommendation is to get a Medicare Supplement even if you are in good health because you need a Medicare Health Plan that not only meets your needs today but will continue to meet your needs as you get older and your health care needs change . If you wait until you need a Medicare Supplement because your health has changed you may not be able to . Insurance companies that offer Medicare Supplement Plans can and do turn down people that have serious pre-existing health conditions .
My sick sense of humor almost tempts me to say `` No , real estate agents are specifically excluded from getting health insurance by law '' but I wo n't do that . Yes , you can get health insurance . What you do for a living has no bearing on your eligibility for health insurance , especially now that ObamaCare is in full effect regarding guaranteed issuance of policies . In my experience , most real estate agents are self-employed/1099 contractor status people and not W2 employees of an agency . So , this probably means that you will need to get individual health insurance either through your state 's government health insurance marketplace or outside of it . So , just like you would tell those `` For Sale By Owner '' folks , you need to seek out an experienced health insurance agent who can assist you in obtaining coverage . If you have been without health insurance for more than 60-days and have n't had what is called a `` change of life status event '' -LRB- marriage , divorce , childbirth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- then you are in a time frame where you would be ineligible for enrollment in true major medical insurance until the next annual open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 and the earliest your coverage could go into effect would be for January 1st , 2015 . I hate to be the one to deliver this news but that is how ObamaCare works . Your only coverage option to carry you through until then would be to take out a Short Term Medical insurance plan . There are a variety of short term medical plan options available . However , you need to be aware that short term medical plans do still use limited underwriting questions , can decline a person for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . Please feel free to contact me if you need advice or assistance in this matter .
Lets suppose you own a business . Obviously you cant do everything yourself , so you need to hire people with special skills . Collectively you can get to where you want to go . The people with special skills might include a high-ranking executive . Might also include a highly skilled technician . Perhaps a top salesman . All these people play roles that are key to the operation . And you , as the entrepreneur of the enterprise , are very much a key person too . This is not to say that people who are not key do not bring value to the company and are not important . If all the business needed was key people , why would you hire anybody else ? But key people are the ones whose loss would create the biggest problems . Sales could go down . Vendors might not get paid . Clients might get nervous about orders being filled . Banks might think twice about lending money . You need to protect your business against the loss of these people . If any or all of them disappeared tomorrow , you need to be sure that your business can go full speed ahead . Employees , clients , prospects , vendors , lenders , investors , and everyone else related to your business , need to be reassured that business will take place as usual . And that takes money . If you have the exact amount of money you need exactly when you need it , then you could tell people to not worry . Orders will get filled . Bills will get paid . You can take the time needed to find the right replacement . And you dont want to have to set up an investment program to cover these people . Nor do you want to have to borrow the money . You want this coverage to come as cheaply as possible without any hoops to jump through . That is what life insurance does when it is purchased for key person coverage .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
The requirements for receiving VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance recently changed -RRB- . For those retiring from the service before Nov 1 , 2012 , you must apply within 1 year and 120 days from the date you separated from the service . At this point in time , you will need to answer some health questions to be eligible to get the policy . You also need to have been on SGLI while you served , in order to qualify for VGLI . If you retired after Nov 1 , 2012 . you have 240 days to apply for VGLI without answering health questions . If you miss that deadline , you can get VGLI with evidence of good health if you apply within 1 year and 120 days from the date you separated from the service . Again , you must be on SGLI at the time you left the service , in order to qualify for VGLI . Others who can get VGLI are the Individual Ready Reserve or Inactive National Guard . If you do not fit any of these categories , or do not wish to go that route , veterans can get an individual policy from private companies . Some of the health conditions that , unfortunately , can hit veterans disproportionately high are hepatitis , PTSD , diabetes , and others . Going to a company that specializes in any health conditions you might have will be a big help .
There are two paths to getting group health insurance for your business . First , the `` do it yourself '' approach where you can call up or go to a health insurance carrier 's web site and request a quote . Of course , this assumes you know all the health insurance carrier options in your state and that you will know what information you need to have available to get a quote . You may also discover that a health insurance carrier does n't work directly with the group consumer and they will recommend you seek out an insurance broker . Keep in mind that a group health insurance carrier can only talk to you about their products and services so you ca n't expect them to help you comparison shop and , of course , every health insurance carrier thinks their products are the best . This brings us to the appropriate option , seek out a group health insurance broker . Do a web search , ask a fellow businessperson or friend but find an experienced , knowledgeable employee benefits professional to guide you through this process . There is a lot involved in setting up an employee benefits program and with the market changes imposed by Obamacare the task has become even more complex and demanding . If you are needing help in setting up or reviewing your group health plan contact me at WEBSITELINK .
There are several carriers that will insure you if you have no license If you are needing to get your license and to get that you need a what is called a SR22 which means you will maintain insurance . Then you can get an insurance policy at first with no license then once you get the SR22 you get your license and then change your insurance to having a license and the rates will lower . You need to explain to your agent that you are trying to get your license and that you ca n't get it with our insurance . the average cost for a SR22 is $ 25.00 ever 6 months plus the price of insurance . Each state is different but there are carriers that will insure you .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
The where/who question is a great one !! Our belief at ' I Hate Buying Insurance ' is the UNDERWRITING is the tail that wags the dog -LRB- one of my fav southern sayings -RRB- . There are hundreds of options across the country for Term Life . Each carrier has a different underwriting appetite . Do you have 5 - 10 extra pounds to shed ? That will be a factor between when determining what health tier you qualify for . Most carrier have 4 tiers & are commonly called Standard , Standard Plus , Preferred , and Preferred Plus . Most life insurance shoppers understand that health plays a huge role in determining the `` rate '' you qualify for . Yet lifestyle , occupation , hobbies , family health history , & more play into the rate you qualify for . A top agency will work with dozens of carriers . What name , mascot , or even financial rating -LRB- do n't sweat A - vs. A + + -RRB- are all secondary to getting the best underwriting for your specific needs . One carrier may offer you Standard while a Preferred is available at a second . Another thing to consider as of this writing is a new generation of Term Life called `` Living Benefits Life '' -LRB- LBL -RRB- You DO N'T have to die to use you `` life '' insurance anymore . Several carriers offer the ability to accelerate when diagnosed with a range of Critical or Chronic Illnesses . Just think of it as accessing the bank vault early . If you were diagnosed with invasive cancer , would n't it be to get a large sum of cash to help pay for deductibles , time away from work , home health care , & travel to the hospital you need that is in a different state ? LBL life might just do all that for you My suggestion for shopping Term Life plans : 1 . If the agent or dot.com you call doesnt ask A LOT of questions about health , history , & lifestyle , RUN . All theyre doing is guessing . Accurate rates do NOT come from age , height/weight , & current tobacco use . The agent needs to interview you so youre matched with the right carrier . 2 . Dont be afraid to ask the agent , What underwriting factors lead you to this option vs. any other carrier ? 3 . See if the agent offers you a LBL option . IF NOT , it is my strong opinion that her/she is NOT on top of current trends . If an agent or dot.com is doing what is best for you , several ideas/options should be explored . If you have any questions or comments , reach out to us !
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
Getting the best life insurance quotes can be like walking a tightrope . Some agents will quote low just to get your application . Then when you are approved , they simply send you the policy , assuming you will be tired of the process and just give in and accept it.Other agents quote high because they would rather give you good news that your rate turned out lower than higher than quoted . What really matters in the end , is that you get a policy with a life insurance company that is favorable to your type of health , age , and the type of policy you get -LRB- Term , Whole Life , or Universal Life -RRB- . So no matter what quote you get , you need to pay close attention to the credentials of your agent . Some things to look at are : 1 -RRB- Are they able to shop for you from more than one company ? 2 -RRB- Do they ask questions to determine what policies and ratings you qualify for ? 3 -RRB- Do they appear to understand your health condition -LRB- s -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Do they have a following as evidenced by testimonials , referrals , etc ? 5 -RRB- If they have a website , does it have security and privacy features ? 6 -RRB- Do they appear to be sincere and honest ? If you can get in touch with an agent who has those credentials , chances are that your quote will be as accurate as possible . More importantly , no matter what your quote is , you will have the best chance at being approved at the best rate with the best company for your particular health and age .
How do you define cheap ? In 2014 the average monthly cost for a Silver level ObamaCare compliant major medical plan was $ 328 . By that standard any coverage costing less than that would be `` cheap '' . People who qualify for little or no subsidy of their individual health insurance -LRB- shame on you for making more than $ 42,000 annually -RRB- may argue that $ 328 or more per month for health insurance is n't affordable much less cheap . But the folks in Washington , D.C. know better about these things than you do . Some people who are healthy and are low consumers of health care services have turned to Short Term Medical plans as a more affordable option for health insurance coverage . And , indeed this may work out well for some people as Short Term Medical policies are generally cheaper than individual major medical policies . However , before pursuing this strategy you do need to be aware that Short Term Medical plans do n't cover pre-existing conditions , usually do n't cover preventive care , may not cover prescription drugs and may have other limitations . Also , they do not meet the criteria under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual coverage mandate and therefore can leave you vulnerable to a tax penalty for noncompliance . You should seek out an experienced health insurance agent to discuss your needs and options and to fully understand whatever health insurance product it is that you purchase .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How To Choose A Home Insurance Company ?
Home insurance coverage should be consistent with other coverage you purchase , like auto insurance . Similar amounts of insurance , enough to cover the cost to repair or replace your home and other property . Similar liability limits , in case your negligence injures someone . Similar perils , if your car is covered for `` any '' damage , your home and property should be as well . Similar deductibles , I suggest deductibles not less than $ 1000 . And it is not a bad idea to combine coverage with the same insurer whenever possible . Its better to deal with someone you already know and trust.If you do n't , it may be a good time to find new auto insurance as well .
The best insurance company is the company that pays the most when you have a loss . All insurance companies are companies that manage a pool of similar risks . Every insurance company is regulated by the insurance commissioner in the state where the company is organized and the state where the company is allowed to transact business . This combination of state supervision is designed to make sure that each company keeps their promises . There are rating bureaus that offer information concerning various insurance companies . These bureaus generally give higher ratings to larger companies with longer histories . They are rating the financial capacity of the companies . While this is a good indicator of which insurance company to choose it is far from the only criteria . Ultimately most people buy homeowners insurance from an agent . That agent might represent one company or one hundred companies . The point is that the relationship is not with the company as much as it is with the agent . People buy insurance from people that they trust . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . The agent will propose a company . Few reject the company selected by the agent . The role of the company is to keep the promises that it makes . There are a wide range of homes for insurance companies to insure . Some companies have an appetite for homes that are in the mountains or heavily wooded areas . Other companies will not even consider such a risk . Some companies will insure homes on bluffs overlooking the ocean while others wont consider such a risk . Underwriting will often have special rules regarding roof type , location of an evaporative cooler , presence of certain pets and presence of certain types of recreational equipment . There are many reasons for some of these underwriting decisions but the agent will be able to identify the best company for you . The underwriter will try to suggest appropriate coverages . Even if you had the most highly rated company if the limits selected are not adequate , you could be left with a large loss in the event of a disaster . For example , you might have a significant amount of jewelry , photographic equipment , or musical instruments . If these are not insured correctly their loss could represent a significant financial loss for you . The most significant area of underinsuring is liability . Your agent should let you know the highest amount that the company will provide . If you choose less coverage , any loss in excess to the limit in the policy will come out of your assets . Your agent should tell you about the availability of umbrella liability coverage . A lawsuit can make havoc out of the best financial plan . Finally the way that the company pays the loss when you have a claim is the most critical factor . Homeowners claims are infrequent but tend to be severe . It is important that the agent you have selected assists you during this critical period . Maintaining communications with you during a claim is an identification of a really good insurance company .
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
Does Long Term Care cover a nursing home ? In most cases the answer is yes . However coverage will be created by what you choose for your plan design . In most all cases nursing home coverage is a base aspect of any plan , but you can choose in many plans to include assisted living or home care along with nursing homes .
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
I know this will sound trite , but you choose a good policy with good advice which means first choosing a good life insurance professional . Also consider that one must choose the right policy , not just a good one . By that I mean , choose a policy that matches the need . If you have a temporary need , term is fine and is inexpensive relative to permanent life products . If you have a permanent need , do not buy term insurance as it is a good product but the wrong solution . Also consider the company you choose since they need to be around to pay the claim - look for top rated insurers . Again , a life insurance professional will help you with all of this .
`` Excess Charges '' only occur with Part B coverage . Whether or not a Medicare Beneficiary may be subjected to Part B Excess Charges by a provider depends entirely on how the provider is contracted with Medicare . When the provider choose their method of contracting with Medicare they must choose whether they will be `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' . This terminology may be confusing but it really is not . `` Participating '' simply means the provider will accept the Medicare assignment of the Medicare approved amount as payment as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered . `` Non-Participating '' means the provider has chosen to not necessarily accept the Medicare approved amount as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered and may choose to charge the beneficiary up to 15 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- in addition to the beneficiary 's cost sharing amount -RRB- . The provider may choose on a case-by-case basis whether to seek excess charges from the beneficiary . This rule applies ONLY to physician fee schedules thus applies only to Medicare Part B charges . So it depends entirely upon whether the provider has chosen to contract as a `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' provider with Medicare . If you are in doubt it may be beneficial to contact the office manager at your provider 's office and ask whether the provider is `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' as it applies to Medicare approved payments . All the best . Mark
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
-- > Normal 0 Basic homeowners policies provide coverage in three general areas . They agree to indemnify you for some or all of the cost to repair or replace your home or your personal property should it be damaged or destroyed . They agree to indemnify you for some or all of your increased living expenses should your home be damaged or destroyed and you are required to live somewhere else while your home is being repaired . They agree to provide you a legal defense for certain civil actions should something you do or fail to do cause someone injury or damage and they will pay some or all of civil judgments should you be found responsible . How well you are reimbursed for these types of expenses depends on the specific policy you purchase , the premium you pay and the insurer you choose . You might also be interested in the Insurance Library responses to questions like What Should I Look For When Buying Home Insurance ? and How To Select Homeowners Insurance ?
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
You must be a mortgage broker or you 're buying your first home . I get this question all the time from mortgage company reps and first-time home buyers . There are many factors that make up a home insurance rate . Location of the home Age of the home Credit of the insured Other policies for discounts Coverage options you choose Most mortgage brokers use $ 50/m as an estimate as they work up your paperwork . My advice would be to work with a licensed agent that represents multiple insurance companies so they can shop for you .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Different providers offer solutions for insuring your home and managing the cost of that protection . There are several things that you should be able to consider whenlooking for Home insurance and it is best to consult your insurance professional . Generally speaking , you may find that it is less costly to insure a newer home vs an older one . Choosing a $ 1000 deductible rather than a $ 500 or $ 250 , will reduce your premium . Install a central monitored security and fire system and that may save you about 10 % . Always ask about bundling your Home , Auto and Life insurance plans because these bundling plans can really save you money . Check to see if your carrier offers discounts for installing a new roof or upgrading your plumbing , electrical or HVAC systems . Finally , maintain your home . Fixing small problems as they show themselves will usually keep repair costs down . Maintaining your home andpropertyis also the best way to protect it from storm damage .
How to check medicare eligibility for providers . The first thing you need is medicare part a & part b . If you have that than you have a choice to stay with original medicare or you can choose a medicare advantage plan . You can choose any provider you want to with part a & b , however the most important thing you want to look out for when choosing a plan is if your doctor and hospital is in the network . Than you want to look at if your medication is covered .
When you take out your policy you can choose your deductible . Most people today are choosing either $ 500 or $ 1000 deductibles . I have seen some at $ 250 . very few people have a $ 100 deductible today because of the difference in premium . When choosing your deductible look at the differences in premium . It usually makes more sense to choose the higher deductible .
You can choose to pay Whole Life for the rest of your life , or you can choose to have it paid up at a set time . You can even choose to purchase some whole life policies with one premium , called Single Premium Whole Life . Premiums are proportionately larger , the shorter the time you choose to pay them . Shop around for a Whole Life policy that offers the options you desire , at a premium you can afford .
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
There are hundreds and hundreds of good lifeinsurance companies . There are certain things to look for in getting good products at good premiums . First look for life insurance companies that specialize in life insurance and not the car or health companies that sell life insurance as a product line . You can choose well known life companies like Metlife , Prudential , NY Life , Transamerica , ING or John Hancock . These are great life insurance companies with big marketing budgets so theydo not always have the best premiums for the coverage . There are great little known life insurance companies like SBLI , Banner , Genworth , Assurity or Minnesota Life that usually independent brokers know about but not the general public because they do n't market their company and many times have better premiums for the same exact product of the well known names . Second look at the companies ratings with AM Best , Moody 's , Standard Poor 's and Fitch . Only choose `` A '' rated companies for financial strength . You want the company to pay your loved ones when you die .
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Reduced Paid Up Whole Life Insurance ?
Reduced paid up whole life insurance is a policy for which the policy owner no longer wanted to pay premiums , but did not want to lose the death benefit . Rather than surrender the policy , or take the cash value , the policy owner decided to turn the policy into a reduced paid up whole life insurance policy . It has a lower death benefit than the original face amount of the policy , but requires no more premium payments and will pay out the stated , reduced benefit when death occurs .
If a life insurance policy is truly `` paid up '' it simply means no further premiums are due and it is guaranteed to be that way . Some people use the term `` paid up '' incorrectly to describe premium `` offsets '' using dividend values to pay required premiums . Such arrangements are not paid up and not guaranteed . More on this in the last paragraph . Some whole life policies are designed to be paid up at a relatively early duration e.g. Policy Year 20 , Age 65 , etc. . The premiums for these policies are relatively high as a result . In comparison , in most cases , whole life policies are designed to have required premiums to age 95 or 100 or later . Such policies have relatively low premiums and are not paid up until age 95 or 100 . A policy can also be `` paid up '' at a lesser value than the death benefit . Whole life policies feature a `` reduced paid up '' non forfeiture provision . In the event the policy owner wishes to stop paying annual required premiums , the policy owner can ask the insurer to reduce the death benefit amount for the policy so that no further premiums would need to be paid . It is important to note that policies which use policy dividends and/or the cash value of Paid Up Additions to offset the required premiums due at some future point are not `` paid up '' . In a low interest environment like we have now , dividends are being reduced from what was illustrated . Many clients who expected to stop paying premiums and instead pay them via the dividend values in their policy can not do so yet since the dividend values are not sufficient to offset premiums .
First , the Reduced Paid Up feature of your policy allows you to stop making premium payments and accept a reduced paid up option for whatever the reduced face amount is at the time you utilize the option . For example if your 20 year old $ 20,000 policy has a Reduced Paid Up of $ 12,000 and you utilize the option you would have a paid up policy of $ 12,000 with no further premium payments required . If the amount of the reduced paid up insurance is sufficient for your personal needs , you could use the money you paid for your policy and pay premiums on a policy for your daughter . This is not complicated at all and replacement is not an issue since you are keeping your policy . The Reduced Paid Up option does not allow for any up front cash however other than the money you save on premiums . Some Mutual companies that pay dividends . You could take the dividends in cash and use them to help pay for a policy if you have a policy that pays dividends . You could take a loan on the cash value of your policy but I really do not recommend doing that since the loan will reduce your death benefit or you could cash surrender a couple of policies if you do not need the insurance .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Whole life insurance has many advantages to it . The first being that your premiums are fixed and guaranteed for the rest of your life and as a permanent insurance program , it builds cash value over time . If it 's a participating whole life policy , any dividends that are paid out can be used to either increase the death benefit via paid up additions , reduce your premium , or make a payment to you directly -LRB- options depend on which carriers whole life policy you have -RRB- . If you use the dividends to reduce the premium , the policy can become self-sustaining after a number of years - meaning no more premium payments . Non-participating policies only build cash value - these types of plans do not pay out dividends . If you 're buying whole life coverage when you 're young and its cash value builds for years and years , it can create a nice nest egg for funds that can be used during your retirement years . It 's important to remember that if you borrow from an insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the monies are expected to be paid back . If you cash out the policy , you lose the life insurance coverage . An alternative for those who are not very concerned about the cash value and want to maximize the death benefit of your life insurance , you may want to consider a guaranteed universal life policy instead of whole life . GULs can offer a larger amount of coverage than whole life policies for the same premium or save you a ton of money on your premiums for a given level of coverage . Make sure to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can create a structure that will best serve your needs , goals , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
Simply put a Life Insurance policy is paid up when according to contract you no longer have to pay on a policy to maintain the face amount . A 20 Pay Whole Life , $ 25000 policy for example would be paid up in 20 years for the full face amount . A term insurance policy does not have this feature so do n't be confused by a 20 year TERM policy . You also have reduced paid up options in a Whole Life contract by using the cash value to purchase a reduced face amount .
Reduced paid up whole life insurance is a policy for which the policy owner no longer wanted to pay premiums , but did not want to lose the death benefit . Rather than surrender the policy , or take the cash value , the policy owner decided to turn the policy into a reduced paid up whole life insurance policy . It has a lower death benefit than the original face amount of the policy , but requires no more premium payments and will pay out the stated , reduced benefit when death occurs .
A life insurance policy is paid up when all required annual premiums have been paid . If the policy is a `` whole life paid up at age 95 '' contract , the policy is paid up at age 95 . It is important to note that the term `` paid up '' is often misused . In whole life policies that pay policy dividends , the dividend values are frequently used to buy `` paid up additions '' which are paid up , additional amounts of insurance that have cash value and add to the base policy . The cash value of paid up additions may be projected , based on the current dividend scale , to grow to a point in the future where those values may be used to premiums on the base policy . The policy is not paid up when the policy owner pays premiums this way .
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
Graded Benefit Whole Life Insurance is whole life insurance that pays a reduced benefit during the first one to three years , then pays the full death benefit after that . E.g. . If death occurred during year one or two , it may pay back all you paid in , plus 10 % . If death occurred during year three or afterwards , it would pay the beneficiary the whole death benefit . Different policies are graded a different number of years , and each carrier has their own criteria for how much is paid back during the graded years . Most graded benefit whole life policies are only graded for natural death . I.e. death due to illness or old age . They usually pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one for accidental death . Guaranteed issue whole life policies are graded , and some simplified issue policies are graded . Simplified issue policies are those that do not require an exam . The biggest thing to watch out for with graded whole life insurance is whether the premium stays level for life . Some graded whole life policies have premiums that go up at regular intervals . With some , the company may raise the premiums at any time , as long as they do so for everyone owning that type of policy . If you anticipate living longer than a few years , it is best to buy a graded benefit whole life policy where the premium will stay level for the rest of your life . Please feel free to contact me at any time if you would like to see whether you qualify for an immediate benefit policy , or to get some competitive quotes for several graded benefit policies that have the price locked in for life .
Whole Life is designed to last your whole life . Your premiums will cover the the cost of insurance protection until the day you die , or else pay you the money in a lump sum if you do not die by a certain age . Whole Life also has a savings component that allows you to borrow from the cash value , if you desire . Universal Life also has the components of insurance protection -LRB- death benefit -RRB- plus savings -LRB- cash value -RRB- . But UL can be designed in a multitude of ways , and it can be further adjusted while the policy is in existence . E.g. . You might want your Universal Life policy to have a large face amount when your children are in the home , but then reduce the face amount to simply pay for final expenses when you are older . You have the flexibility to do that with Universal Life . Not only that , but when you reduce the face amount , you might be able to also reduce or quit paying premiums . Or you can keep paying the same premium and cause your policy to build up extra cash value . A word of caution when buying Universal Life . It is called permanent life insurance , but it is not guaranteed to be permanent unless you choose a UL policy that states that guarantee . Thankfully , there are guaranteed no lapse UL policies on the market ; even those where you can `` dial '' the guarantee to make the policy last to whatever age you choose . As with Whole Life , if you borrow from the policy , you must pay the money back with interest to ensure that your death benefit will be paid per the terms of the contract .
When life insurance is paid up , it simply means that no further premiums are required to keep the policy in force . The policy may have been set up to where you only needed to pay a single premium in a lump sum . Or it may have required that you paid premiums for a certain number of years , and then it became paid up . In any event , you owe no more premiums and your beneficiary would receive the full face amount or more , if you passed . Or you may have decided to quit paying on the policy early , and were given theoption to take it as a reduced paid up policy . In this case , the face amount will be less than what you originally applied for , but the reduced face amount will stay in effect without you paying any more premiums .
This is the amount of insurance that if you stopped making premium payments today and elected to take a paid up policy , you would have that amount of insurance for the rest of your life . A 20 pay life policy would be paid up in 20 years with no premium due after that time while the insurance is still in force . A whole life policy can have a reduced paid up option after enough cash value has accumulated in the policy to provide a paid up policy . This table can be found in your policy . A good agent can help review your policy with you to help you understand your non-forfiture options
Whole Life covers you for your `` whole life '' . Term Life covers you for a term , or set number of years . Whole Life has cash value that can be utilized while you are still alive . Term Life does not -LRB- except for Term with living benefits , which allows you to use part of the death benefit if certain triggers are met -RRB- . Whole Life allows you to pay the entire premium at once , or in a limited number of years , after which no more premiums are owed . Term Life requires that you make periodic payments over the entire duration of the policy . If you drop a Whole Life policy after some length of time , you will usually have a reduced paid up policy that you can keep without making further premium payments . If you drop a Term policy , your coverage ends and you do not have any return of cash -LRB- unless you buy ROP , or return of premium Term Life -RRB- . With participating Whole Life , you may get dividend checks over the years . With Term Life , the only benefit you get will be if you die before the term ends . Whole Life costs more because it is a permanent product and has cash value in addition to death protection . Term Life costs less because it is temporary and offers pure death protection .
When a life insurance policy is paid up it simply means that no more premiums are due to maintain the death benefit . It is like paying off your car . Mutual companies who pay dividends allow you to take your dividends in the form of paid up insurance . This allows you to increase your death benefit . With whole life policies you can also take a reduced paid up policy which allows you to stop making premium payments in exchange for a lesser face amount that would be considered paid up .
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Water Heater Replacement ?
If your asking can homeowners insurance cover your water heater because it wore out then the answer is no . Insurance polices are not maintenance polices and do not cover wear and tear . Some insurance polices do an option for mechanical breakdown at an extra premium but again , even this extension of coverage would not cover just plain old wearing out .
If your water heater just wears out then no homeowners insurance will not cover the water heater . If your water heater was to burst for example and water damaged your home then your insurance will cover the damage to the home but still will not cover the water heater . If something outside damages the water heater such as a fire , or falling object then the water heater would be covered .
Homeowners insurance does not cover the replacement of an old hot water heater but it MAY cover damage caused by a leaking hot water heater as long as the home owner is not found to have neglected the normal maintence of his home which does include replacing your water heater before it rusts through .
It would depend on what happened to the water heater and what type of policy you have . If thewater heater is damaged in a fire , or a tornado , you should havecoverage . A `` special form '' insurance policy will normally cover damage from a burst water heater , so they will pay for the clean up of the water but not to replace the water heater it 's self , since it was the cause of the claim . Remember , an insurance policy is for damage , but not maintenance . So if it quits , or does n't function like it is supposed to , that is an expense you would have to absorb . If the water heater is damaged by a `` Covered peril '' -LRB- refer to your contract -RRB- - then yes , it is part of the house and covered like anything else .
Your water heater is part of your home , just like th rest of your plumbing system , so yes , it would be covered . What it is covered for depends on what type of coverage you have purchased . For example home insurance does n't pay for mechanical failure , so if it just quits working you do n't have a claim . If your water heater bursts , you may have coverage for water damage coming out of the water heater if you havea `` Special Form '' policy . If the house burns up and your water heater goes along with it , your insurance should pay for a home with a water heater . So you see it depends a lot . Email me with specifics at WEBSITELINK
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
The homeowners policy will provide coverage for damage caused by a ruptured hot water heater . It will not replace the hot water heater , itself . It is very important to get assistance urgently as water damage never improves , it only gets worse . It is particularly critical if carpets or wood floors are involved .
Typically a water heater will be covered if there is damage from a source OTHER than wear and tear or flood . The damage resulting from a water heater leak is generally covered . The one exception will be mold that forms away from the original water damage sight , if the mold becomes airborne . I would check with your local independent agent to make sure the company he/she selects for you has water damage coverage limits sufficient enough to cover a claim should it arise . Here in NC there are sub-limits to water damage claims .
Boilers are a specialized form of insurance and include inspection services . The homeowners policy will cover a loss that results from a sudden release of water or steam . The vessel is the issue here and a homeowners policy does not cover the boiler . The same is true of a residential hot water heater . The policy will pay for loss as the result of a failure ; however , it will not replace the appliance .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . The resulting damage from a water heater that suddenly ruptures is a covered loss . The water heater itself is not covered but the resulting water damage to your personal belongings would be covered . Check your deductible before filing a claim to make sure it makes sense to file the claim .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
This depends on the cause . If water is seeping though the walls , it typically is not covered as that would be considered maintenance . If the water is due to flood , it would only be covered under a flood policy . If the damage was due to a busted pipe or water heater , it would normally be covered . Repairs for common damp basements are not covered by homeowners insurance .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
Great question . Your water heather is not something your home insurance will cover in a claim situation . You will have to pay to replace it yourself . Unless you have a home warranty policy that can cover your water heater . Good luck and you should always contact your local insuance broker for additional questions .
This is a difficult question to answer without viewing your specific policy and the coverages contained in it . Is a water heater covered within a policy , generally yes . It just depends on what happens . For example , general wear and tare is not covered under the standard homeowners policy ; however , if you adding coverage for appliances or household items -LRB- that would have cost you more each year -RRB- or you pay for a home warranty , it could be covered for wear and tare . If the damage is from a busted pipe that occurred by no fault of your own or was from a power surge , it could be protected if the policy is setup correctly . It does come down to what exactly you have your policy and within the policy what the limits are . If you have a home warranty program that is always the best way to go because claims with the warranty companies will not result in higher premiums for your homeowners policy , but if you take a claim against your homeowners for the coverage -LRB- EVEN if it is n't covered -RRB- it could result in a slight increase in your prices for next year . If the cost is less than your deductible it would n't benefit you to make a claim on the home policy either .
It really depends upon the cause of the presumed damage to your water heater . If the unit simply fails , or bursts die to wear and tear , then the resulting water damage to your property may be covered but not the unit itself . If the unit is damaged as a result of a lightening strike , however , it may be possible that the damage to the unit may be covered under your Homeowners ' policy . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your contract .
Check with your insurance agent to find out if you have a `` named peril '' or `` all risk '' policy . This will help you determine when your water heater is covered under a homeowners policy . Normal wear and tear or maintenance is not covered . However , some companies are now offering a separate home warranty policy that can cover plumbing , electrical , heating and applicances .
Tenants should always have coverage because the dwelling policy the owner of the property will take out does not cover the tenants belongings . Policies a very affordable and as a tenant they can choose the amount of coverage they want to carry . Coverage for their belongings as well as liability in the event someone is injured and Pursues them legally . In the event a water heater breaks , roof leaks , a/c damages their belongings the renter could look toward their personal home policy .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can I Change From Medicare Advantage To Medigap ?
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
You can change your Medigap Plan at any point throughout the year . You do not have to wait for AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period from Oct. 15 - Dec 7 -RRB- . The Annual Election Period only applies to Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug Plans . You 'll have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan if you are not in your Open Enrollment Period or other Guaranteed Issue situation . To medically qualify , you have to answer health questions on the insurance application and then get approved through the medical underwriting department . It is best to contact Medicare or an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to see if you are still in Open Enrollment or a Guaranteed Issue situation . If you have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan , an independent agent can review your health history and help determine which insurance companies are best suited for your situation . There are several reasons why you may want to change your Medigap plan -LRB- lower premium , more benefits , less benefits -RRB- . The main reason people want to change is usually because of price . Over time , premiums increase and what you may be paying for Plan F may be very different from your neighbor . Although Medigap plan benefits are standardized , the price is not . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can provide quotes for your Medigap Plan so you can compare it to what you 're currently paying . Please feel free to read this article which gives a little more detail about changing your Medigap insurance . WEBSITELINK Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you with your specific situation .
No and you would not want to . You have a choice to have a Medigap Plan -LRB- Medicare Supplement Plan -RRB- or a Medicare Advantage Plan . Here is a quick list of some of the differences . Medicare Advantage - - Low to zero monthly premium - Has a network which can change from year to year - Benefits can change from year to year - Max out of pocket is $ 6,700 per year on most plans Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement Plan -RRB- - Has a monthly premium - No Network . You can go to any doctor or hospital you want that takes Medicare . - Benefits can not change - Max out of pocket can be zero or very low You should review all of your options with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . It will save you a lot of time and money . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Are you referring to a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage plan , or a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan ? Your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- is provided by the federal government . You can apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan anytime during the year . You can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering yes/no health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check -RRB- if you 're outside your initial enrollment period -LRB- when you were new to Medicare Part B -RRB- and do not have a guarantee-issue right available to you . Medical underwriting for Medicare Supplement plans can be done in less than a week . There are no exams for these products . Please note , a common concern I hear a lot from individuals looking to replace their Medicare Supplement plans is they 're worried they 're at risk of losing the existing one if they apply for a new one and get declined . This is NOT true ! Even if you apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan and get declined , you can always keep the existing plan because Medicare Supplement plans are guaranteed renewable . If you 're looking to change your prescription drug plan provider or your Medicare Advantage plan provider , you can only make a change during certain times of the year . For the most part , you can only make changes during the annual enrollment period each year -LRB- between October 15 - December 7 -RRB- with changes becoming effective January 1 . Outside of this enrollment period , you can only make changes under certain situations -LRB- known as special enrollment periods -RRB- . An example of this is if you moved outside of the plan 's service area . For a full list of situations that qualify you for special enrollment periods to make changes , please visit the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap works along side your original Medicare helping to pay Medicare covered expenses that are not paid for by Medicare due to deductibles and coinsurance . You will pay a premium for a Medigap plan but your out of pocket exposure in the event of a large claim will be less than with a Medicare Advantage plan Medicare Advantage takes the place of Medicare . While you are still in the Medicare system and protections , responsibility for benefits and claim management are provided by the insurance company , not Medicare . You can not have both a Medigap and a Medicare Advantage Plan since Medicare Advantage has different deductibles and copay 's than Medicare . Premiums are much less than Medigap plans but you will have more out of pocket exposure in most cases .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Medigap Insurance , also called `` Medicare Supplement '' Insurance works with original Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- to provide coverage for the `` gaps '' - the coinsurance and deductibles required to be paid by the Medicare beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- under original Medicare . Although Medicare represents excellent insurance coverage , these `` gaps '' can be expensive for the consumer . For example , the Part A -LRB- hospitalization -RRB- deductible for 2015 is $ 1,260 , and the Part B -LRB- doctors costs , etc. -RRB- is $ 147 plus 20 % coinsurance . A Medigap policy insures these potentially large `` gaps '' with the payment of a known monthly premium . Medigap Insurance is optional for the consumer - there is no `` requirement '' to purchase it , although it is a good idea to get some Medigap coverage if staying with original Medicare . Alternatively , Medicare beneficiaries may select a Medicare Advantage Plan . Although there are costs and limitations in Medicare Advantage Plans , a beneficiary does not need , nor can they purchase Medigap Insurance under a Medicare Advantage Plan .
Let me start by saying that Medigap isnt the same as Part B but lets get a better understanding of how Medicare works . If you look at page 17 of the 2015 Medicare and You book you will see there are 2 main choices on how you can get your Medicare coverage . There is Original Medicare that includes Part A and B with the option to fill in the gaps in Original Medicare by buying a Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Or there is Medicare Advantage Plan , Part C , which include Part A , Part B and in most cases Part D. On page 92 of the Medicare and You book you will find that all Medigap policies are standardized . All polices offer that same basic benefits but different insurance companies may charge you different premiums for the same exact policy . Its a good idea to use a good broker that represents multi companies that can show you not only the price difference but also the average rate increases because all Medigap policies go up every year . Now there are different Medigap plans A-N , the easiest way to think about this is like car insurance . You can buy a car insurance policy with no deductible but by doing so your premium will be higher . If you choose to assume some of the risk , buying a policy with a deductible your premium will be lower . As long as youre in fairly good health -LRB- no major illnesses or recent hospitalization with in the last 2 years -RRB- you can show the market for the lowest price , remember Medigap plans always have a price increase each year and its always a wise decision to shop around every couple of years to find the best price . I am aware of one insurance company that once you are approved , will allow you to change between plans without re-looking at your current health , which may be a viable option if you want to save money with a higher deductible while you are in good health and then when your health starts to change you change your plan to a lower deductible . If you have any other question feel free to contact me for a phone review or we can chat on Skype .
Yes , you can switch from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . To do so , you must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage plan . Then you must enroll in original Medicare . If anyone asks you to buy a Medigap policy without being enrolled in original Medicare , you should report them . If you have never used Medigap before and you had Medicare Advantage for under a year , you can have your choice of Medigap policies .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
Medicare Advantage plans are quite different from a Medicare supplement plan , also known as Medigap . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer in original Medicare . Your health insurance is covered by a private insurance carrier . Medical providers file your claims with your Advantage carrier , not Medicare . Most Advantage plans have networks you are required to use if you want full coverage . Some Advantage plans provide OON -LRB- out of network -RRB- coverage but with higher deductibles , copay 's and coinsurance . HMO Advantage plans typically have no benefits when you use a non-par provider . With original Medicare you have the freedom to use any doctor , hospital or other medical provider anywhere in the country . There are no networks . Medical providers file claims with Medicare . Once Medicare adjudicates and approves the claim it is forwarded on to your Medigap carrier so they can pay their portion .
end question
